Immunity
Review
Germinal Center B Cell Dynamics
Luka Mesin,1,2Jonatan Ersching,1,2and Gabriel D. Victora1,2,*
1Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
2Present address: Laboratory of Lymphocyte Dynamics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA
*Correspondence: victora@rockefeller.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.09.001
Germinal centers (GCs) are the site of antibody diversiﬁcation and afﬁnity maturation and as such are vitally
important for humoral immunity. The study of GC biology has undergone a renaissance in the past 10 years,
with a succession of ﬁndings that have transformed our understanding of the cellular dynamics of afﬁnity
maturation. In this review, we discuss recent developments in the ﬁeld, with special emphasis on how GCcellular and clonal dynamics shape antibody afﬁnity and diversity during the immune response.
Introduction
One of the hallmarks of the humoral immune response is the pro-
gressive increase in the afﬁnity of antibodies over time ( Eisen,
2014; Eisen and Siskind, 1964 ). This increase is the result of acti-
vation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)-driven somatic hyper-
mutation (SHM) of the antigen-binding variable regions of immu-
noglobulin (Ig) genes ( Berek and Milstein, 1987; Muramatsu
et al., 2000; Weigert et al., 1970 ), which generates a panel of
mutated B cells that are then selected, based on their afﬁnity,
to proliferate and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasmacells (PCs) and memory B (Bmem) cells. This selective processoccurs in microanatomical structures known as germinal centers
(GCs) ( Berek et al., 1991; Jacob et al., 1991b ), which emerge in
several copies within secondary lymphoid organs upon expo-sure to antigen by infection or immunization. In these structures,
B cells compete for an array of signals that are delivered in an af-
ﬁnity-dependent manner, so that B cells with higher-afﬁnity Bcell receptors (BCRs, the complex formed by surface immuno-
globulin [sIg] and the Ig aand Ig bco-receptors) are expected
to progressively outcompete lower-afﬁnity B cells. Differentia-tion over time of PCs and Bmem cells from this evolving popula-
tion drives the increase in the overall afﬁnity of serum antibodies
during the primary response and upon re-immunization or re-infection ( Berek and Milstein, 1987; Eisen and Siskind, 1964 ).
A fundamental characteristic of the GC reaction is its dynamic
nature. At the cellular level, GC B cells constantly migrate be-
tween microanatomical compartments as they undergo iterativecycles of SHM and selection and seek to obtain, from other GC-
resident cell populations, the signals required for their survival. At
the clonal level, the expansion and contraction of clonal popula-tions based on their relative ﬁtness follows a dynamics of its own,
much akin to Darwinian selection. In the present review, we pro-
vide an overview of our current understanding of cellular andclonal dynamics in the GC, with greater emphasis on ﬁndingsarising since our last review of the ﬁeld ( Victora and Nussenz-
weig, 2012 ). Although we brieﬂy touch upon molecular aspects
when appropriate, more thorough reviews of these topics areavailable elsewhere ( Basso and Dalla-Favera, 2015; De Silva
and Klein, 2015 ). Likewise, the vast amount of knowledge that
has recently been generated on the differentiation and regulationof the T follicular helper (Tfh) cells that support GC selection has
been extensively reviewed in recent years ( Crotty, 2014; Vinuesa
et al., 2016 ) and is beyond our present scope.Functional Anatomy of the GC
GCs form in the center of the B cell follicles of secondary
lymphoid organs, interspersed within a network of stromal cells
known as follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) ( Heesters et al.,
2014 ). In follicles that do not contain GCs (primary follicles),
FDCs play an organizational role, helping B cells to aggregate
into compact, well-deﬁned clusters ( Wang et al., 2011 ). In sec-
ondary follicles (which contain GCs), FDCs are located within
the GC itself, where they perform two general roles. The best
characterized of these is the long-term retention of intact antigenwithin complement-coated immune complexes, in a form thatcan support the afﬁnity-dependent ‘‘testing’’ of SHM-modiﬁed
BCRs that occurs during GC selection ( Heesters et al., 2014 ).
A recent study has shown that antigen in fact recycles betweenthe FDC surface and nondegradative endosomal compartments,
suggesting a mechanism by which antigen can be maintained on
these cells for the extended periods required for efﬁcient afﬁnitymaturation ( Heesters et al., 2013 ). A second role for FDCs is to
support GC B cell survival and the overall proliﬁcacy of the GC
reaction. This is supported by the ﬁnding that preventing FDCactivation through TLR4 results in smaller GCs and lower anti-
body titers in response to immunization ( Garin et al., 2010 ).
GC formation begins with acquisition of antigen by resting
B cells ( Cyster, 2010; Gonzalez et al., 2011 ), followed by their
migration to the border between the B cell follicle and the T
cell zone (T:B border), where they receive co-stimulatory signals
from CD4
+helper T cells ( Garside et al., 1998; Okada et al.,
2005 ). This interaction triggers a period of intense proliferation
in which responding B cells are located preferentially in the outer
B cell follicle ( Coffey et al., 2009 ). A fraction of these cells will then
coalesce into tight clusters in the follicle center, in close apposi-
tion with the FDC network, giving rise to the early GC. GC B cells
are held together by modulations in the expression of several Gprotein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). One of these is Ebi2—thereceptor for 7 a,25-dihydroxycholesterol—which normally at-
tracts naive B cells toward the outer follicle but is strongly down-
regulated in GC B cells ( Gatto et al., 2009, 2011; Hannedouche
et al., 2011; Kelly et al., 2011; Pereira et al., 2009 ). A second
GPCR that contributes to GC B cell clustering is S1P
2, one of
ﬁve receptors for the signaling lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate(S1P) ( Cyster and Schwab, 2012; Green and Cyster, 2012 ).
S1P
2acts through inhibitory G protein subunits G a12 and
Ga13 to prevent GC B cells—and Tfh cells—from migrating
Immunity 45, September 20, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc. 471

toward S1P-rich areas in the outer follicle ( Green et al., 2011;
Moriyama et al., 2014 ). In humans, S1P 2acts in concert with
the orphan GPCR P2YR8, which also signals through G a13.
Deletion of Gna13 or its downstream effector Arhgef1 in mice al-
lows GC B cells to leave their tight clusters and disseminate into
lymph and blood ( Muppidi et al., 2014 ). Interestingly, when GC B
cells are made resistant to apoptosis by expression of a Bcl2
transgene, ablation of the FDC network itself causes GC B cellsto disperse, suggesting that FDCs may help maintain low con-
centrations of S1P, and possibly of a putative P2YR8 ligand, in
the follicle center ( Muppidi et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2011 ).
A deﬁning feature of the mature GC is its division into two com-
partments, or ‘‘zones’’ ( Figure 1 ). The pole of the GC closest to
the T cell zone in lymph nodes and spleen, and from whichFDCs are largely absent, is referred to as the dark zone (DZ).
The pole distal to the T zone, closest to the capsule in LN or mar-
ginal zone in spleen, and rich in FDCs, is referred to as the lightzone (LZ). The origin of these names is historical: the LZ appears
‘‘lighter’’ in histology using traditional DNA stains due to the
sparser distribution of lymphocyte nuclei among a more abun-dant stromal network ( Allen et al., 2007a ).
The DZ consists primarily of a tight cluster of highly prolifera-
tive B cells, known classically as ‘‘centroblasts,’’ which strongly
express the chemokine receptor CXCR4 ( Allen et al., 2004,
2007b; Victora et al., 2010, 2012 ). The DZ stroma consists
of a delicate meshwork of CXCL12-expressing reticular cells
(CRCs) that are thought to be the source of the CXCL12 chemo-kine (the ligand for CXCR4) that holds DZ B cells away from the
FDC network ( Bannard et al., 2013; Rodda et al., 2015 ). DZ B
cells have high expression of AID and the error-prone DNA poly-merase eta (Pol h, which introduces point mutations into DNA
when repairing AID-induced lesions) ( McHeyzer-Williams et al.,
2015; Victora et al., 2010, 2012 ). This expression pattern sug-
gests that the DZ is the site of Ig SHM, and therefore where clonalvariants with different afﬁnities for antigen are generated ( Victora
et al., 2010, 2012 ).
The LZ is less compact and more diverse than the DZ. In addi-
tion to GC B cells and FDCs, the LZ contains a large proportion of
inﬁltrating naive B cells ( Schwickert et al., 2007 ) and a smaller but
crucially important population of Tfh cells. As we will see below,
FDC TFHBLZ
BDZCD83hi
CD86hi
G1/early S
CD83low
CD86low
AIDhi Polηhi= SHM
G1/S/G2/MˢCXCR4ˣCXCR4 BMEM


PC
BDZ
BDZTBM
TBM ˢFoxo1ˢ1*,"LU
ˢc-Myc (selected cells)
)JHIFSBGGJOJUZTXJUDIFE#$3
Rela
ˢIRF4
ˢBlimp-1	  
Lower affinity
Higher affinity
Non-functional BCR
IgE BCRDark Zone    Light Zone4PNFXIBUMPXFSBGGJOJUZ
ˢ
Bach2Figure 1. Overview of the GC Reaction
The GC is divided into two anatomical compart-
ments, LZ and DZ, which are the sites of antigen-driven selection and of B cell proliferation and
hypermutation, respectively. Afﬁnity maturation
happens in cycles of proliferation and SHM in the
DZ followed by antigen-driven selection in the LZ.
See text for further details. TBM, tingible bodymacrophage.
Tfh cells play a fundamental role in the
positive selection of higher-afﬁnity B
cells, driving their proliferation and differ-
entiation into the PC fate ( Allen et al.,
2007b; Meyer-Hermann et al., 2006; Vic-tora et al., 2010 ). There has been a dra-
matic increase in our knowledge of Tfh
cell biology in recent years, and thereare excellent reviews on the subject
(Crotty, 2014; Vinuesa et al., 2016 ). A recent development has
been the discovery that a subset of GC-resident CD4
+T cells ex-
press the regulatory T (Treg) cell master regulator Foxp3, while
sharing many phenotypic characteristics of Tfh cells ( Chung
et al., 2011; Linterman et al., 2011; Wollenberg et al., 2011 ).
The precise origin, antigen speciﬁcity, and nature and mecha-
nism of regulation by these ‘‘T follicular regulatory’’ (Tfr) cells iscurrently under intense scrutiny ( Ramiscal and Vinuesa, 2013;
Sage and Sharpe, 2015 ). LZ B cells themselves are traditionally
referred to as ‘‘centrocytes.’’ These cells display an activated
phenotype, including higher expression of activation markersCD86 and CD83 ( Victora et al., 2010, 2012 ). Other features
such as the overexpression of gene signatures associated with
activation of the CD40 and BCR pathways and of Myc are also
indicative of an activated state ( Dominguez-Sola et al., 2012;
Victora et al., 2010, 2012 ). Together, the presence of antigen
and Tfh cell help and the activated phenotype of its resident Bcells suggest that the LZ is the site of selection of high-afﬁnity
SHM variants.
The segregation of proliferation and hypermutation in the DZ
from antigen-driven selection in the LZ requires that cells migratebetween these two zones for afﬁnity maturation to occur. Early
mathematical modeling studies propose that iterative cycles of
SHM followed by selection (in DZ and LZ, respectively) wouldbe required to achieve the degree of afﬁnity maturation observed
in vivo, a theoretical framework known as cyclic re-entry ( Kepler
and Perelson, 1993; Oprea and Perelson, 1997 ). According to
this model, a fraction of LZ B cells with improved afﬁnity is
allowed to re-enter the DZ for further rounds of proliferation
and SHM. Recent studies have provided ample experimentalevidence for the re-entry of selected B cells from LZ to DZ
upon antigen-driven selection ( Allen et al., 2007b; Gitlin et al.,
2014; Schwickert et al., 2007; Victora et al., 2010 ).
More recent work has focused on the molecular mechanisms
that control the transition of B cells between the GC zones and
their associated phenotypes. The initial ﬁnding that many of
the genes upregulated in LZ B cells could be linked to B cell acti-vation by antigen or T cells ( Victora et al., 2010, 2012 ) led us to
speculate that, rather than being cell intrinsic, much of the LZ
phenotype was a consequence of exposure to the signals
472 Immunity 45, September 20, 2016Immunity
Review

present in the LZ ( Victora and Nussenzweig, 2012 ). However,
forcing DZ B cells into the LZ by deletion of the DZ-homing re-
ceptor CXCR4 is not sufﬁcient to turn on a LZ program in DZ
cells, implying that DZ cells must have a cell-intrinsic ‘‘timer’’that restricts the emergence of a LZ phenotype even when these
cells are physically located in the LZ ( Bannard et al., 2013 ). Later
work showing that, upon arrival to the DZ, GC B cells execute apre-programmed number of divisions before being allowed to re-turn to the LZ, suggested that, rather than (or in addition to) a
timer, there may be a cell-intrinsic ‘‘division counter’’ restricting
the DZ to LZ transition ( Gitlin et al., 2014 ). Further insight into
these dynamics comes from two parallel studies of the role in
GC B cells of transcription factor Foxo1 ( Dominguez-Sola
et al., 2015; Sander et al., 2015 ). Deletion of a loxP-ﬂanked
allele of Foxo1 in GC B cells using an Ighg1 -cre (also known
asg1-cre) driver results in ‘‘DZ-less’’ GCs, in which all B cells
reside in the LZ and display the LZ surface phenotype(CXCR4
loCD86hi), although certain essential features of DZ B
cells—such as rapid proliferation and SHM—are maintained to
different extents. Interestingly, gene expression proﬁling and
ChIP-seq experiments show that part of the role of Foxo1 inthe DZ is to suppress activation-related genes, including genes
involved in BCR signaling and T cell-mediated activation. There-
fore, one possibility is that Foxo1 may help maintain a non-acti-vated phenotype in DZ B cells, even when these are physically
forced into the LZ by deletion of CXCR4.
Still unresolved is the role of the physical segregation of afﬁn-
ity-based selection from proliferation and SHM. This segregation
is conserved across species, and the gene expression programs
that distinguish LZ and DZ B cells in mice and humans are largelyoverlapping ( Victora et al., 2012 ). Surprisingly, however, disrup-
tion of LZ-DZ polarity by deletion of CXCR4 has little if any effect
on the efﬁciency of afﬁnity maturation toward a hapten antigen
(Nie et al., 2004 ) and leads only to a moderate decrease in the
number of mutations accrued by B cells in inﬂuenza-induced
and Peyer’s patch GCs ( Bannard et al., 2013 ). Whether LZ-DZ
segregation plays a role in preventing potentially deleterious out-comes of GC selection, such as autoimmunity and B cell trans-
formation, has not been investigated.
Positive Selection of High-Afﬁnity Clones in the GC
Afﬁnity maturation relies on the ability of the GC to select B cells
based on the afﬁnity of their BCRs for antigen. The dynamics ofthis selection were initially quantiﬁed in intravital photoactivation
experiments, revealing that although the LZ is constantly being
repopulated by massive immigration from the DZ (at a rate of50% of DZ cells transitioning to the LZ over a period of /C244 hr),
less than 10% of LZ cells return to the DZ over a period of
6 hr. Simple mathematical analysis of these rates based on a cy-clic re-entry framework ( Victora et al., 2010 ), later reﬁned using
more sophisticated models ( Meyer-Hermann et al., 2012 ), esti-
mates that on the order of 10%–30% of B cells that arrive tothe LZ are selected to re-enter the DZ (the remainder either dyingby apoptosis or exiting the GC). The question of how GCs select
for high-afﬁnity B cells can thus be rephrased as how the best
cells are selected to re-enter from LZ to DZ.
Two candidate antigen-based signals are available to B cells
in the LZ, arising from the dual role of the BCR as a signaling
and an endocytic receptor ( Allen et al., 2007a; Victora andNussenzweig, 2012 ). The ﬁrst signal is from antigen itself, which
is held on FDCs in a form that can bind to and signal through the
BCR. Although signaling through the BCR is required during the
initiation of the B cell response, the role of such signaling in GC Bcells is less clear. A surprising ﬁnding is that most GC B cells
appear unresponsive to BCR stimulation by antigens in solution,
with the exception of a brief period of Syk phosphorylation thatcoincides with the G2/M phase of the cell cycle in the DZ ( Khalil
et al., 2012; Victora et al., 2010 ). This unresponsiveness has
been conﬁrmed by experiments using a Nur77 -GFP reporter,
which in B cells is speciﬁcally activated by BCR engagement(Mueller et al., 2015; Zikherman et al., 2012 ). Despite an overall
low signal, a small fraction of GC B cells, mostly located in the
LZ, strongly express GFP. These cells upregulate certain genesrelated to positive selection (such as Myc,Ccnd2 , and Irf4), sug-
gesting that these may indeed represent cells undergoing anti-
gen-driven selection ( Mueller et al., 2015 ). A recent study in
which GC B cells are exposed to antigen displayed on immobi-lized plasma membrane sheets (PMSs) shows that, differently
from antigens in solution, PMS-bound antigen can efﬁciently
activate signaling downstream of the BCR in GC B cells, withthe notable exception of nuclear translocation of NF- kB p50,
which required CD40 ligation ( Nowosad et al., 2016 ). Thus,
although antigen stimulation can under certain circumstancestrigger signaling in GC B cells, the key step of NF- kB activation
appears to require additional input from T cells.
Further insight into the role of BCR signaling in GC selection
comes from studies of the fate of cells that have undergone
class-switch recombination (CSR), which have different sig-
naling capabilities due to the extended cytoplasmic tails ofswitched isotypes. A recent report in which CSR to IgG
1is
induced by crerecombination in the absence of SHM shows
that, although IgG 1+GC B cells display lower expression of
Nur77 -GFP than their IgM+counterparts, neither isotype ap-
pears to be favored (or disfavored) during GC selection ( Gitlin
et al., 2016 ). Thus the different signaling capabilities of IgG1 do
not strongly affect GC B cell competitiveness. However, switch-ing to IgE strongly disfavors permanence in the GC, such that IgE
cells correspond to at best a minor population within GCs, even
when a strong serum IgE response is induced ( Erazo et al., 2007;
He et al., 2013; Talay et al., 2012; Xiong et al., 2012; Yang et al.,2012 ). A detailed study of the dynamics of IgE
+GC B cells show
that these cells are mostly restricted to the DZ, are more likely
to be apoptotic, express markedly lower amounts of sIg, andare impaired in their ability to phosphorylate downstream medi-
ators in response to soluble antigen ( He et al., 2013 ). Thus, a pos-
sibility is that IgE-expressing B cells may fail a BCR-dependentcheckpoint required for DZ to LZ transition ( He et al., 2015 ),
possibly related to the G2/M BCR signal described by Khalil
et al. (2012 ).
The second antigen-dependent signal available to GC B cells
is delivered by cognate interaction with Tfh cells. B cells use the
BCR to retrieve antigen deposited on the membranes of othercells (FDCs in the case of the GC) in an afﬁnity-dependentmanner ( Batista and Neuberger, 2000 ). By applying tensile force
to the antigen-antibody bond, B cells can readily discriminate
between ligands with different afﬁnities ( Natkanski et al.,
2013 ), and this process appears to be especially efﬁcient in
GC B cells due to their distinctive synapse conﬁguration
Immunity 45, September 20, 2016 473Immunity
Review

(Nowosad et al., 2016 ). Antigen retrieved in this fashion can be
presented to helper T cells, providing a mechanism whereby
T cells can sense B cell afﬁnity indirectly. Competition between
GC B cells displaying different surface densities of peptide-MHCII for a limited number of Tfh cells would then drive GC se-
lection. This ‘‘T cell-centric’’ model was conceived through a
combination of mathematical modeling ( Meyer-Hermann et al.,
2006; Radmacher et al., 1998 ), in vitro studies ( Batista and Neu-
berger, 2000 ), and intravital imaging ( Allen et al., 2007b ), and
later conﬁrmed experimentally in vivo ( Gitlin et al., 2014, 2015;
Shulman et al., 2013; Victora et al., 2010 ). A useful experimental
system in this sense has been the targeted loading of T cell an-
tigen onto class II MHC on GC B cells by fusing it to an antibody
to the surface lectin DEC-205 ( Victora et al., 2010 ). Acutely
increasing pMHC concentration in a subset of DEC-205-ex-
pressing GC B cells (within a majority DEC-205
/C0[Ly75/C0//C0]
population) forces these cells to interact strongly with Tfh cells,triggering them to migrate from LZ to DZ, proliferate extensively,
and differentiate into PCs. Thus, T cell help is sufﬁcient to drive
cyclic re-entry and GC selection. Further in vivo studies haveshown that T cell help not only triggers cyclic re-entry, but
also increases the number of divisions and the cell cycle speed
of selected B cells in a manner proportional to the intensity ofthe B cell-Tfh cell interaction ( Gitlin et al., 2014, 2015 ). Under
steady-state conditions, B cells divide on average twice per
LZ-DZ cycle: the ‘‘typical’’ selected B cell will initiate one cell cy-
cle while still in the LZ, then migrate to the DZ during S-phase.There it will divide into two daughters, each of which will un-
dergo another full cell cycle before returning to the LZ ( Figure 2 ).
The number of consecutive DZ cycles, and therefore DZ dwelltime, is increased dramatically by DEC-205 antigen targeting
(Gitlin et al., 2014 ). The strength of the T cell signal thus directly
controls not only the odds of a GC B cell surviving in the LZ butalso the number of divisions this cell will undergo upon transi-
tioning to the DZ. Therefore, a simple model where T cell signals
rescue GC B cells from apoptosis ( Liu et al., 1989 ) cannot fully
explain the process of GC selection. These ﬁndings also impli-cate Tfh cell help as being responsible for setting the ‘‘timer’’
or ‘‘counter’’ ( Bannard et al., 2013 ) that determines the length
of residency of a GC B cell in the DZ.
Some mechanistic insight has been gained into how Tfh cells
drive B cell selection. At the cellular level, Tfh cells can be readily
observed to engage in cell-cell contacts with B cells in GCs,although these are generally of short duration ( Allen et al.,
2007b ). An interesting ﬁnding is that GC B cell:T cell interactions
are prone to feed-forward loops: ICOSL on B cells promotes up-
regulation of CD40L on T cells, which in turn further upregulatesICOSL on the B cell, and so forth. Such loops promote a mode of
intimate contact in which a large area of the B and T cell surfaces
are juxtaposed, which was described as ‘‘entanglement’’ ( Liu
et al., 2015 ). Entanglement and contact duration are greatly
increased by antigen delivery to B cells through DEC-205 ( Shul-
man et al., 2014 ), which also enhances T cell production of B cell
helper cytokines IL-4 and IL-21. In addition, Tfh cells are the ma-jor source of the pro-survival cytokine BAFF (also known as
BLyS) in the GC, and BAFF produced by Tfh cells was shown
to promote the survival of B cells that have acquired high-afﬁnitymutations ( Goenka et al., 2014 ). Thus, small differences in pMHC
density between B cells of different afﬁnities can be nonlinearly
ampliﬁed into large gains in signaling that would allow for moreefﬁcient selection of higher-afﬁnity B cells, and possibly trigger
the multiple rounds of DZ proliferation seen after DEC-205 tar-
geting ( Gitlin et al., 2014 ). Interestingly, class II MHC molecules
are rapidly turned over on DZ B cells by ubiquitin-mediated
degradation, ensuring that peptide-MHCII density is ‘‘reset’’ af-
ter every LZ-DZ cycle ( Bannard et al., 2016 ). Such resetting
may prevent carryover of peptide-MHC molecules from previousselection rounds from interfering with a T cell’s sensing of the
afﬁnity of a B cell’s current BCR.
At the molecular level, the proto-oncogene Myc—previously
thought to be silenced in GC B cells—has been shown to be
brieﬂy but strongly induced in LZ B cells that are undergoing pos-
itive selection ( Calado et al., 2012; Dominguez-Sola et al., 2012 ).
Antigen targeting to GC B cells through DEC-205 induces strong
upregulation of c-Myc in targeted cells, implicating Tfh cell sig-
nals in the induction of c-Myc under physiological conditions.Interestingly, c-Myc is shut down in the DZ, where most B cell
proliferation takes place ( Calado et al., 2012; Dominguez-Sola
et al., 2012 ). A recent study shows that the transcription factor
AP4 is induced by c-Myc in a delayed fashion in positivelyselected GC B cells, so that its expression is sustained in the
DZ. Ablation of AP4 decreases the ability of B cells to undergo
additional rounds of proliferation in the DZ, suggesting thatAP4 may perform a similar role in the DZ as Myc does in the
LZ. Thus, AP4 could be an essential component of the DZ
‘‘timer’’ or ‘‘counter’’ ( Chou et al., 2016 ).%BSL;POF-JHIU;POF8FBLTJHOBM
5')#"WFSBHFTJHOBM
5')#4USPOHTJHOBM
4IPSUFOFEDFMMDZDMF
lDMPOBMCVSTUz
5')#Figure 2. Dynamic Control of B Cell
Proliferation
The intensity of T cell help received in the LZ
determines the number of division cycles a B cell
will undergo in the DZ. On average, there are two
S-phase initiation events in the LZ for each one in
the DZ, indicating a ratio of two cell cycles per LZ-
DZ cycle (center) ( Gitlin et al., 2015 ). A B cell that
receives the minimum amount of help necessary
for survival (left) would undergo only one cell cycle
per LZ/DZ cycle, whereas a B cell that receives astrong Tfh cell signal (either due to DEC-205 tar-
geting or prior to a ‘‘clonal burst;’’ right) ( Tas et al.,
2016 ) can undergo multiple cell cycles in the DZ
without returning to the LZ.
474 Immunity 45, September 20, 2016Immunity
Review

A ﬁnal mechanism that may contribute to GC selection is anti-
body-mediated feedback, whereby soluble antibody ‘‘masks’’
antigen held on FDCs, effectively competing with B cells bearing
BCRs of overlapping speciﬁcities ( Zhang et al., 2013 ). This
mechanism could explain how clones of widely different afﬁnities
can coexist within the same reaction ( Kuraoka et al., 2016; Tas
et al., 2016 ; see discussion below), since low-afﬁnity clones
would be expected to survive if they are speciﬁc for epitopesagainst which little secreted antibody exists. Importantly, such
a mechanism would be compatible with both BCR and T cell-
driven selection models, given that greater antigen availabilitywould allow for stronger BCR signaling as well as for more anti-
gen retrieval for presentation to T cells.
Negative Selection of Self-Reactive Clones in the GC
A risk associated with random SHM is the introduction of muta-tions that lead to recognition of self-antigens, which cangenerate autoreactive antibodies and potentially lead to autoim-
mune disease ( Shlomchik et al., 1987; Tiller et al., 2010 ). Thus, in
addition to selecting for cells with the highest afﬁnity for theimmunizing antigen, GCs are thought to rely on autoreactivity
‘‘checkpoints’’ to eliminate B cells that acquire the ability to
bind self. To study these checkpoints, Chan et al. (2012 ) devel-
oped a sophisticated genetic system in which adoptively trans-
ferred monoclonal B cells speciﬁc for hen egg lysozyme (SW
HEL)
are allowed to afﬁnity mature in GCs elicited by immunizationwith an HEL triple mutant (HEL3X), to which SW
HELcells bind
with low afﬁnity. Afﬁnity maturation selects for SHM variants
with increased afﬁnity for HEL3X but which now also bind aquadruple mutant HEL4X. When this experiment is performedin hosts that express HEL4X as a pseudo-self-antigen in different
tissues, appearance of these highest-afﬁnity variants (and thus,
the failure of GC autoreactivity checkpoints) can be preciselymonitored. These studies show that self-antigens can censor
GC output only when expressed within or near the GC, but not
when expressed as tissue-speciﬁc antigens in the liver or kid-neys ( Chan et al., 2012 ). A follow-up study has shown that the
pro-apoptotic receptor FAS, highly expressed in GC B cells, is
not necessary for negative selection of HEL4X-binding cells.Rather, FAS is required to prevent the generation of ‘‘rogue’’GC B cells that escape normal antigen-driven selection and
differentiate into PCs that secrete copious amounts of autoreac-
tive (HEL4X-binding) IgG and IgE ( Butt et al., 2015 ). Additionally,
under certain conditions, GCs are able to use SHM to eliminate
pre-existing self-reactivity to ubiquitous antigens, essentially
‘‘redeeming’’ formerly autoreactive clones to promote theirparticipation in immune responses to foreign antigens, even if
this means selecting for B cells with lower rather than higher af-
ﬁnity ( Sabouri et al., 2014 ). Likewise, unusual human antibodies
with broad reactivity against Plasmodium falciparum -infected
erythrocytes and that carry a gene insertion between the IGH V
and DJ segments derived from the gene encoding collagen bind-ing protein LAIR1 show somatic mutations that decrease bindingto collagen, again suggesting selection for loss of autoreactivity
in GCs ( Tan et al., 2016 ). Thus, multiple checkpoints appear to
prevent the emergence of autoreactivity to widely available anti-gens; however, checkpoints against reactivity to tissue-speciﬁc
self-antigens appear to be absent. Nonetheless, polyreactivity
(reactivity to several unrelated antigens, which can be self ornonself) is a common consequence of SHM, in that polyreactive
B cells are frequent within the Bmem cell population in mice and
humans ( Gitlin et al., 2016; Tiller et al., 2007 ). Interestingly, poly-
reactive Bmem cells appear to be shorter lived than their non-polyreactive counterparts, suggesting that autoreactive B cells
generated by SHM may be held at bay by a post-GC control
mechanism that eliminates such cells from the memory pool(Gitlin et al., 2016 ).
Clonal Diversity and Evolution in the GC
In order to enter a GC, antigen-binding B cells must ﬁrst receive
cognate signals from T helper cells activated by the same or
a linked antigen, delivered at the T:B border ( Garside et al.,
1998; Okada et al., 2005 ). Access to the GC is competitive, in
that even B cell clones with very low afﬁnity for antigen are al-
lowed to colonize GCs in the absence of competition from otherclones that bind the same antigen ( Dal Porto et al., 1998;
Schwickert et al., 2011 ). A commonly held view is that such
pre-GC competition is highly restrictive, so that only a handful
of ‘‘founder’’ clones seed each individual GC. This view stemsfrom a series of reports that inferred total clonal diversity from
the prevalence of homogeneous GCs in responses containing
two distinguishable populations of B cells ( Jacob et al., 1991a;
Kroese et al., 1987; Liu et al., 1991 ), but was questioned by a
study that directly measured clonal diversity by sequencing Ig
genes from single human GC B cells picked from histologicalsections ( Ku¨ppers et al., 1993 ).
More recently, we have used in situ photoactivation followed
by ﬂow cytometry ( Shulman et al., 2013; Victora et al., 2010 )t o
obtain large numbers of single cells from GCs at around thepeak of clonal diversity (6 days after immunization with antigen
in alum) ( Tas et al., 2016 ). This approach shows that clonal diver-
sity in individual GCs can be quite high—reaching more than 100clones per GC for immunization with chicken gamma globulin
(CGG, a model antigen consisting of a mixture of chicken immu-
noglobulins of different isotypes)—but can also vary substan-tially depending on the antigen used. Thus, although no strict
bottleneck limits the number of founder cells in a GC, the full
extent of early-GC clonal diversity appears to be determinedby antigen-related properties, possibly including frequency ofspeciﬁc naive precursors or the immunodominance relation-
ships between the antigen’s epitopes. A further possibility is
that polyclonal recruitment of B cells that have no speciﬁcity to-ward the immunizing antigen—presumably through direct adju-
vant effects on B cells or through noncognate T cell help—could
add to the initial diversity of GCs. Indeed, several studies havereported that antibodies cloned from GC (or other activated) B
cells do not always bind the immunizing antigen by ELISA or
other assays ( Di Niro et al., 2015; Kuraoka et al., 2016; Tas
et al., 2016 ). However, transgenic B cells with monoclonal spec-
iﬁcity for antigens other than those used for infection or immuni-
zation fail to participate in the antibody response, indicating thatBCR sequence—and, presumably, antigen speciﬁcity—is adetermining factor in GC recruitment ( Di Niro et al., 2015; Tas
et al., 2016 ). Accordingly, analysis of the unmutated ancestor
of a potent broadly neutralizing antibody (bNAb) to inﬂuenzashows limited or no antigen binding by ELISA, although the
same antibody could trigger calcium ﬂux when expressed on
the surface of a B cell exposed to antigen (
Lingwood et al.,
Immunity 45, September 20, 2016 475Immunity
Review

2012 ). Thus, it is likely that many GC B cells bind antigen with af-
ﬁnities that are not detectable by standard binding assays butwhich are nonetheless biologically relevant.
Once the GC structure is formed, bona ﬁde GC competition
begins to take place. This consists of a combination of interclo-
nal competition (between clones bearing different V(D)J rear-
rangements, and therefore including a variety of epitope speci-
ﬁcities and starting afﬁnities) and intraclonal competition
(between SHM variants of the same clone, and thus speciﬁc
for the same epitope). Early studies show that hapten-driven
GCs tend to become more clonally homogeneous over time(Jacob et al., 1993 ) and can contain variable-sized expansions
of particular SHM variants ( Ziegner et al., 1994 ), thus providing
evidence of both interclonal and intraclonal competition. A
caveat of these studies is that hapten-protein conjugatesgenerate antibody responses that are strongly focused on the
hapten and heavily dominated by stereotypical V genes. There-
fore, even though many clones with distinct V(D)J rearrange-ments may participate in the response, competition occurs
mostly between B cells that bind the same epitope, and is thus
perhaps better described as being intraclonal ( Kuraoka et al.,
2016 ).
Two recent studies ( Kuraoka et al., 2016; Tas et al., 2016 ) have
attempted to circumvent hapten-related issues by using tech-nologies that allow examination of the more diverse GC re-sponses to unhaptenated protein antigens. In one of these
studies, we applied multicolor fate-mapping using a ‘‘Brainbow’’
allele to estimate the rate at which individual GCs became clon-ally homogeneous over time ( Tas et al., 2016 ). Our ﬁndings show
that most GCs retain substantial clonal diversity within the
3-week lifetime of the GC response to CGG in alum. However,rapid and massive expansion of higher-afﬁnity SHM variants
(which we refer to as ‘‘clonal bursts’’) leads to substantial loss
of diversity in a subset of GCs. Afﬁnity maturation was observedregardless of the presence of clonal bursts. Thus, while bursts
allow for rapid diversiﬁcation of single SHM mutants at the
expense of clonal diversity, afﬁnity maturation of several clonesin parallel can occur within more diverse GCs, at least over aperiod of a few weeks. A contemporary study by Kuraoka et al.
(2016 ) also provides evidence that afﬁnity can increase without
narrowing the diversity of the responding repertoire in GCsarising in response to immunization with inﬂuenza hemagglutinin
(HA) or anthrax protective antigen (rPA). Using ‘‘Nojima’’ cultures
(Nojima et al., 2011 ) to obtain workable amounts of antibodyfrom single-sorted GC B cells, this study measured the afﬁnities
of a large number of cells from the same responding LN. Whileafﬁnity maturation within GCs is readily observable, there was
no evidence of constriction of repertoire diversity as the GC re-
action progressed. Thus, afﬁnity maturation does not necessarilyinvolve radical loss of diversity ( Figure 3 A), which is teleologically
satisfying for a system that must generate antibodies that are
protective not only against re-challenge with the exact samestrain of pathogen, but also with other variant strains.
These two studies also provide evidence that B cells of widely
disparate afﬁnities can co-exist within the same GC, suggestingthat GC selection is much less strict than generally appreciated(Kuraoka et al., 2016; Tas et al., 2016 ). Mechanistically, the fac-
tors underlying this permissiveness are unclear, but may include
a strong component of stochastic ‘‘noise’’ (deﬁned as anyparameter unrelated to BCR afﬁnity) that is superimposed
upon afﬁnity-based selection. The ﬁnding that Brainbow GCs
can deviate substantially from baseline color distribution evenwhen all cells have identical afﬁnity ( Tas et al., 2016 ) provides
experimental evidence of the degree of noise involved in GC se-
lection. The prominent role of Tfh cells in driving GC selectionwithin a framework that is highly dynamic and prone to strong
feed-forward loops ( Figure 2 ;Gitlin et al., 2014, 2015; Liu et al.,
2015; Shulman et al., 2014 ) suggests a cellular mechanism for
this noise. We propose a speculative model ( Figure 3 B) in which
stochasticity cooperates with changes in afﬁnity in determining
the fate of a mutant GC B cell: although a lower-afﬁnity cell
can be rescued from death by stochastic factors (such as ﬁndinga large portion of antigen on a FDC, or engaging an available,
high-avidity T cell), a higher-afﬁnity B cell favored by these
same factors may become the source of a clonal burst. This sto-chastic component would ensure the maintenance of some
degree of polyclonality while still allowing for strong SHM of a
fraction of selected clones through clonal bursts ( Tas et al.,
2016 ).
Post-GC B Cell Fates
In order to exert their effector or memory functions, B cells mustdifferentiate PCs or Bmem cells, respectively. The choice be-
tween these fates can happen at two distinct stages of the anti-
body response: at the T:B border, recently activated B cellschoose between entering the GC or differentiating into PCs or
Bmem cells; later, within the GC itself, positively selected GC
B cells interrupt the LZ-DZ re-entry cycle to exit the GC, again4UPDIBTUJDDPNQPOFOU
6OGBWPSBCMF 'BWPSBCMF"⒏OJUZ
*NQSPWFE &RVBMMPXFS
$MPOBMCVSTU4VSWJWF
4VSWJWF%JF#PUUMFOFDL
QSF($TFMFDUJPO&BSMZ($UFOTIVOESFET
PGDMPOFTQFS($1SFJNNVOFSFQFSUPJSF
NBOZQPUFOUJBMMZ
SFTQPOTJWFDFMMT.BUVSF($	FOEPG$((BMVNSFTQPOTF

IFUFSPHFOFPVTNJYUVSFPG
NPSFBOEMFTTEJWFSTF($T
"MM($TSFTPMWFHJWFO
FOPVHIUJNF	  
#PUUMFOFDL
($TFMFDUJPO$MPOBMCVSTU
-PXHSBEF
TFMFDUJPOABFigure 3. Clonal Dynamics in GCs
(A) Evolution of clonal diversity in GCs. Each color
corresponds to a different clone (a distinct V(D)Jrearrangement). Many potentially responsive cells
are present in the pre-immune repertoire. Priming
involves a competitive bottleneck, which prevents
many lower-afﬁnity B cells from entering the GC
reaction. Despite this bottleneck, early GCs canstill contain tens to hundreds of distinct clones,
depending on the antigen used for immunization.
Clonal diversity is lost at different rates of indifferent GCs, so that by the end of the response
to a protein antigen in alum, GCs are distributed
across a wide range of clonal diversity. It is not yet known whether all GCs would eventually become monoclonal were the response to last indeﬁnitely.
(B) Speculative model for the inﬂuence of stochastic ‘‘noise’’ (i.e., any factor not directly related to BCR afﬁnity) on GC selection. B cells that fai l to gain afﬁnity
upon SHM can still be rescued by stochastic factors (e.g., fortuitous encounters with antigen-rich FDC patches or with high-avidity Tfh cells). If th e same positive
stochastic factors act on a B cell whose afﬁnity increased by SHM, a clonal burst may ensue.
476 Immunity 45, September 20, 2016Immunity
Review

differentiating into PCs or Bmem cells. Due to technical con-
straints, differentiation from naive progenitors at the T:B border
has been more widely studied than differentiation from within
the GC. How similar or different the rules of differentiation areat these two stages is not clear. A number of studies have shown
that acquisition of a PC phenotype is facilitated by higher afﬁnity,
both in the early (T:B border) response and within ongoing GCs(Paus et al., 2006; Phan et al., 2006; Smith et al., 1997 ), whereas
a recent study suggests that lower-afﬁnity B cells are preferen-
tially recruited into the Bmem cell pool ( Shinnakasu et al.,
2016 ). The mechanism by which afﬁnity may promote PC or
Bmem cell differentiation is not fully understood and, as with se-
lection for cyclic re-entry, could depend on signals from both
BCR and T cell help. Whereas the T cell-independent responseto repetitive antigens argues that, at least in some cases, PC dif-
ferentiation can be triggered by strong BCR signaling alone ( Shih
et al., 2002 ), acutely inducing strong BCR signals triggers
apoptosis in GC B cells ( Han et al., 1995; Pulendran et al.,
1995; Shokat and Goodnow, 1995 ). Alternatively, targeting anti-
gen to B cells through DEC-205 simultaneously triggers massive
differentiation of plasmablasts and GC entry or DZ re-entry, bothat the T:B border and from within ongoing GCs ( Schwickert et al.,
2011; Victora et al., 2010 ). Thus, enhanced T cell help alone is
sufﬁcient to trigger PC differentiation, at least under manipulatedexperimental settings.
An interesting question is whether B cell fate decision occurs
prior to or after proliferation (i.e., at the level of the B cell thatreceived the proliferative signal or independently for each
daughter cell). In the pre-GC response, the answer is most likely
the latter. Early studies show that B cells in extrafollicular foci(predominantly PC or plasmablasts) and GCs share a commonclonal origin ( Jacob et al., 1991a, 1991b ); thus, in agreement
with Burnet’s original predictions ( Burnet, 1957 ), a single naive
lymphocyte can generate distinct progenies. More recently, anelegant study tracing the ability of single antigen-speciﬁc B cells
to differentiate into the PC, GC, Bmem cell, or ‘‘activated precur-
sor’’ fates after T:B border interactions reported that, whereasjust under half of the clones analyzed contained cells of only
one type, clones choosing multiple fates were common, with
about 5%–10% of clones including members of all four cell types(Taylor et al., 2015 ). Multiplicity of fates correlates strongly with
clonal size (which is associated with ability to resist apoptosis
rather than with proliferation), so that clones that included all
four fates comprise more than 30-fold more cells on averagethan clones that follow only one fate. This is consistent with a
previous study showing that increased propensity to generate
PCs is likely secondary to increased survival and proliferationof B cells that previously chose the PC fate ( Chan et al., 2009 ).
Thus, at least in early stages, B cell differentiation appears to
be acting subsequently to proliferation and at the level of eachdaughter cell. In the GC, this question can be rephrased in
anatomical terms: does differentiation occur in the LZ (prior to
proliferation, since selected B cells move from LZ to DZ duringS phase) or in the DZ (during or after one or more rounds ofproliferation)? Only DZ differentiation would be compatible with
models that require asymmetric cell division (see below) or re-
setting of cell state by proliferation ( Duffy et al., 2012 ), and a
theoretical problem would be the chance of an effector cell
acquiring a deleterious or self-reactive mutation that wouldremain untested (since the mutated cell does not go through a
LZ phase prior to exit). The available data on the site of GC B
cell fate choice is ambiguous. Although most studies suggest
that this process initiates in the LZ—for example, Blimp1 andIrf4 are found to be expressed by a minority of cells in this
zone ( Angelin-Duclos et al., 2000; Falini et al., 2000 )—other
studies have proposed a DZ origin for PCs based on cell migra-tion dynamics ( Meyer-Hermann et al., 2012 ).
In addition to afﬁnity, other factors have been found to
contribute to B cell fate choice. The propensity of B cells to differ-
entiate into Bmem cells or PCs has been shown to change overthe course of the antibody response, so that Bmem cells are
generated mostly in the pre-GC and early GC periods, after
which long-lived PC differentiation becomes more pronounced(Weisel et al., 2016 ). Because the afﬁnity of GC B cells for antigen
also increases over time, the temporal hypothesis is not incom-
patible with a role for afﬁnity in promoting the PC fate. Asym-metric cell division, in which one daughter B cell retains mostof the endocytosed antigen ( Thaunat et al., 2012 ) or a higher con-
centration of key molecules for the GC phenotype such as Bcl-6
and the IL-21 receptor ( Barnett et al., 2012 ), may also be involved
in post-GC fate choices. Additionally, BCR isotype may play a
role in B cell fate choice. Enhancement of PC differentiation by
IgG expression in Bmem cells has been widely documented (re-viewed in Xu et al., 2014 ). However, the distinction between the
role of isotype-speciﬁc signaling capabilities and other factors
such as changes in cell state due to prior antigen experience ( Ko-
metani et al., 2013 ) or afﬁnity for antigen (which may be higher in
switched cells) is not always clear. A recent study separating the
effects of SHM and class switching demonstrated that switchingto IgG
1strongly biased B cells toward the PC and against the
Bmem cell fates, independently of any other cell-intrinsic factors,
suggesting an instructive role for the IgG 1signaling tail ( Gitlin
et al., 2016 ). Likewise, activated B cells that switch to IgE during
the early B cell response preferentially adopt the PC over the GC
fate ( Erazo et al., 2007 ). This appears to be related to the expres-
sion of IgE itself, since in vitro-activated B cells that haveswitched to IgE are more likely to differentiate into PCs or plas-
mablasts than those that switched to IgG
1, even in the absence
of antigen ( Yang et al., 2012 ). Finally, B cells from a mouse in
which the human sIgA constant region was inserted upstreamof the C mgene preferentially develop into PCs both in vitro and
in vivo ( Duchez et al., 2010 ). Thus, the skewing of fate decisions
noted in cells expressing non-IgM receptors is most likely adirect result of differences in the signaling capability of IgM
and non-IgM BCRs.
The molecular mechanism underlying GC B cell differentiation
into Bmem cells of distinct phenotypes remains unclear ( Kuro-
saki et al., 2015; Tarlinton and Good-Jacobson, 2013 ). Whereas
no single deterministic transcription factor acting as a ‘‘masterregulator’’ of the Bmem cell fate has yet been identiﬁed, higher
expression of Bach2 in lower-afﬁnity GC B cells can favor
Bmem cell differentiation ( Shinnakasu et al., 2016 ). The molecu-
lar drivers of B cell differentiation into the PC fate are better un-derstood and have been recently reviewed ( Kometani et al.,
2013; Nutt et al., 2015 ). Key in this process is the activation of
the PC master-regulator Blimp1 ( Prdm1 )(Turner et al., 1994 ),
which, among many other functions ( Minnich et al., 2016; Tellier
et al., 2016 ), helps shut down expression of transcription factors
Immunity 45, September 20, 2016 477Immunity
Review

such as Pax5 and Bcl6, responsible for maintenance of B cell
and GC identity, respectively (reviewed in Nutt et al., 2015 ).
What signals underlie the decision of activated or GC B cells to
switch on Blimp1 is an active area of investigation. Dialing upexpression of Irf4 (which at high concentrations represses Bcl-
6) and shutting down expression of Bach2 (which can act as a
repressor of Blimp1) appear to be crucial to establish the PC pro-gram ( Muto et al., 2010; Sciammas et al., 2006 ). Interestingly, the
NF-kB subunit RelA is speciﬁcally required for differentiation of
GC B cells into the PC fate, likely by directly promoting Blimp1
expression independently of Irf4 ( Heise et al., 2014 ). Under-
standing what signals induce activation of RelA in vivo may pro-
vide valuable clues to the cellular processes involved in PC dif-
ferentiation. Other recent developments have included thenotions that epigenetic modiﬁers such as EZH2 and MOZ may
inﬂuence the balance between PC and Bmem cell differentiation
(Be´guelin et al., 2013; Caganova et al., 2013; Good-Jacobson
et al., 2014 ) and that mitochondrial function may provide instruc-
tive signals that can skew activation-induced B cell fates ( Jang
et al., 2015 ).
Long-Lived and Chronic GCs
GC lifespan can vary greatly depending on the nature of the im-mune stimulus. Whereas protein model antigens adsorbed in
alum usually induce short-lived GCs that collapse within the ﬁrst
month after immunization, certain synthetic vaccines, viral infec-tions, or the gut microbiota can induce GCs that remain active for
much longer periods, if not indeﬁnitely ( Adachi et al., 2015; Bach-
mann et al., 1996; Kasturi et al., 2011; Sutherland et al., 2016 ).
Prolonged GC reactions may allow B cells to reach a higher de-gree of afﬁnity maturation ( Klein et al., 2013; Pappas et al., 2014 )
and may represent a means to cope with the antigenic drift asso-
ciated with chronic viral infection ( Bonsignori et al., 2016; Liao
et al., 2013 ). On the other hand, extended SHM in chronic GCs
may cause the appearance of self-reactive variants that eventu-
ally escape negative selection, leading to autoimmunity ( Vinuesa
et al., 2005 ), and may also promote genomic instability and the
emergence of AID-dependent B cell lymphomas ( Robbiani
et al., 2015 ). Despite the importance of chronic GC reactions,
speciﬁc requirements for long-term GC maintenance and therules governing the dynamics of B cell selection under such con-
ditions are poorly deﬁned. Persistence of antigen on FDCs is
likely to be necessary, since axiomatically GC selection cannotproceed in its absence. However, whether antigen depletion
from FDCs is the cause of GC involution in vivo has not been
established, and FDCs can retain antigen for periods muchlonger than the duration of most immunization-induced GCs
(Tew and Mandel, 1979 ). In addition to antigen, innate immune
signals seem to play a pivotal role in sustaining the GC reaction.For example, immunization of mice and non-human primates
with inﬂuenza HA nanoparticles in combination with TLR4
and TLR7 agonists generates GCs that persist for severalmonths ( Kasturi et al., 2011 ). Whether the activity of TLRs is
required in GC B cells themselves or in other cell types remains
to be determined.
An interesting question is whether a long-lived GC response
consists predominantly of GCs that are themselves long-lived,
or of a multiplicity of short-lived GCs that wax and wane with
unsynchronized kinetics, generating an apparently long-livedsteady state. An intermediate scenario is the constant reseeding
of ongoing GC reactions by invasion of recently primed B and
T cells ( Schwickert et al., 2007, 2009; Shulman et al., 2013 ),
which seems to be especially prevalent in Peyer’s patch GCs(Bergqvist et al., 2013 ). The presence of apparently monoclonal
GCs in mesenteric LN and even Peyer’s patches ( Tas et al.,
2016 ) suggests that such invasion is not constantly ongoing,
but may occur only sporadically. Sporadic re-seeding raisesthe possibility that GC longevity could correlate with the extent
to which new B cells are recruited. Importantly, it has been
shown that Bmem cells can re-enter GCs and further diversifytheir BCRs ( Dogan et al., 2009; McHeyzer-Williams et al.,
2015 ). Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that the chronic
responses necessary for the generation of highly mutated Bcell variants such as those that produce HIV bNAbs may involve
sequential ‘‘hopping’’ of B cells between long-lived GCs, likely
through a Bmem cell intermediate.
Conclusions
In the past decade, we have learned great deal about the basiccellular and molecular dynamics of B cell selection in the
GC, in large part thanks to technical innovations in intravital im-
aging and antibody cloning. We are now in a position to revisitaspects of GC selection related to clonal dynamics, which
were placed on hold since the late 1990s awaiting the develop-
ment of appropriate technologies. The realization that bNAbs
to inﬂuenza, plasmodium, and, more strikingly, HIV requireextensive and unconventional histories of SHM and selection,
and the puzzling ﬁnding that highly mutated (and presumably
extensively selected) bNAbs often arise from very low-afﬁnityprecursors, exemplify how little is known regarding the pace
and stringency of GC selection, especially during long-lived re-
sponses ( Klein et al., 2013; Liao et al., 2013; Lingwood et al.,
2012; Pappas et al., 2014; Tan et al., 2016 ). The contribution of
GC selection to phenomena such as immunodominance and
original antigenic sin has also not been established, and is likelyto be of considerable interest. Answering these questions will be
crucial to our quest to produce broadly protective vaccines
against inﬂuenza and HIV ( Burton et al., 2012; Victora and Wil-
son, 2015 ) and will undoubtedly bring novel insights into the
overall functioning of GCs, as well as of the immune system in
general.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank O. Bannard (Oxford University) and D. Dominguez-Sola (Mount Sinai
School of Medicine) for helpful comments and suggestions. This work is sup-
ported by NIH grant DP5OD012146 to G.D.V.
REFERENCES
Adachi, Y., Onodera, T., Yamada, Y., Daio, R., Tsuiji, M., Inoue, T., Kobayashi,
K., Kurosaki, T., Ato, M., and Takahashi, Y. (2015). Distinct germinal center se-
lection at local sites shapes memory B cell response to viral escape. J. Exp.Med. 212, 1709–1723 .
Allen, C.D., Ansel, K.M., Low, C., Lesley, R., Tamamura, H., Fujii, N., and Cys-
ter, J.G. (2004). Germinal center dark and light zone organization is mediated
by CXCR4 and CXCR5. Nat. Immunol. 5, 943–952 .
Allen, C.D., Okada, T., and Cyster, J.G. (2007a). Germinal-center organization
and cellular dynamics. Immunity 27, 190–202 .
478 Immunity 45, September 20, 2016Immunity
Review

Allen, C.D., Okada, T., Tang, H.L., and Cyster, J.G. (2007b). Imaging of
germinal center selection events during afﬁnity maturation. Science 315,
528–531 .
Angelin-Duclos, C., Cattoretti, G., Lin, K.I., and Calame, K. (2000). Commit-
ment of B lymphocytes to a plasma cell fate is associated with Blimp-1 expres-
sion in vivo. J. Immunol. 165, 5462–5471 .
Bachmann, M.F., Odermatt, B., Hengartner, H., and Zinkernagel, R.M. (1996).
Induction of long-lived germinal centers associated with persisting antigen af-
ter viral infection. J. Exp. Med. 183, 2259–2269 .
Bannard, O., Horton, R.M., Allen, C.D., An, J., Nagasawa, T., and Cyster, J.G.
(2013). Germinal center centroblasts transition to a centrocyte phenotype ac-cording to a timed program and depend on the dark zone for effective selec-
tion. Immunity 39, 912–924 .
Bannard, O., McGowan, S.J., Ersching, J., Ishido, S., Victora, G.D., Shin, J.S.,
and Cyster, J.G. (2016). Ubiquitin-mediated ﬂuctuations in MHC class II facil-
itate efﬁcient germinal center B cell responses. J. Exp. Med. 213, 993–1009 .
Barnett, B.E., Ciocca, M.L., Goenka, R., Barnett, L.G., Wu, J., Laufer, T.M.,
Burkhardt, J.K., Cancro, M.P., and Reiner, S.L. (2012). Asymmetric B cell divi-sion in the germinal center reaction. Science 335, 342–344 .
Basso, K., and Dalla-Favera, R. (2015). Germinal centres and B cell lymphoma-
genesis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 172–184 .
Batista, F.D., and Neuberger, M.S. (2000). B cells extract and present immobi-
lized antigen: implications for afﬁnity discrimination. EMBO J. 19, 513–520 .
Be´guelin, W., Popovic, R., Teater, M., Jiang, Y., Bunting, K.L., Rosen, M.,
Shen, H., Yang, S.N., Wang, L., Ezponda, T., et al. (2013). EZH2 is required
for germinal center formation and somatic EZH2 mutations promote lymphoid
transformation. Cancer Cell 23, 677–692 .
Berek, C., and Milstein, C. (1987). Mutation drift and repertoire shift in the
maturation of the immune response. Immunol. Rev. 96, 23–41 .
Berek, C., Berger, A., and Apel, M. (1991). Maturation of the immune response
in germinal centers. Cell 67, 1121–1129 .
Bergqvist, P., Stensson, A., Hazanov, L., Holmberg, A., Mattsson, J., Mehr, R.,
Bemark, M., and Lycke, N.Y. (2013). Re-utilization of germinal centers in mul-
tiple Peyer’s patches results in highly synchronized, oligoclonal, and afﬁnity-
matured gut IgA responses. Mucosal Immunol. 6, 122–135 .
Bonsignori, M., Zhou, T., Sheng, Z., Chen, L., Gao, F., Joyce, M.G., Ozorowski,
G., Chuang, G.Y., Schramm, C.A., Wiehe, K., et al.; NISC Comparative
Sequencing Program (2016). Maturation pathway from germline to broad
HIV-1 neutralizer of a CD4-mimic antibody. Cell 165, 449–463 .
Burnet, F.M. (1957). A modiﬁcation of Jerne’s theory of antibody production
using the concept of clonal selection. Aust. J. Sci. 20, 67–68 .
Burton, D.R., Ahmed, R., Barouch, D.H., Butera, S.T., Crotty, S., Godzik, A.,
Kaufmann, D.E., McElrath, M.J., Nussenzweig, M.C., Pulendran, B., et al.
(2012). A blueprint for HIV vaccine discovery. Cell Host Microbe 12, 396–407 .
Butt, D., Chan, T.D., Bourne, K., Hermes, J.R., Nguyen, A., Statham, A.,
O’Reilly, L.A., Strasser, A., Price, S., Schoﬁeld, P., et al. (2015). FAS inactiva-
tion releases unconventional germinal center B cells that escape antigen con-trol and drive IgE and autoantibody production. Immunity 42, 890–902 .
Caganova, M., Carrisi, C., Varano, G., Mainoldi, F., Zanardi, F., Germain, P.L.,
George, L., Alberghini, F., Ferrarini, L., Talukder, A.K., et al. (2013). Germinalcenter dysregulation by histone methyltransferase EZH2 promotes lympho-
magenesis. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 5009–5022 .
Calado, D.P., Sasaki, Y., Godinho, S.A., Pellerin, A., Ko ¨chert, K., Sleckman,
B.P., de Albora ´n, I.M., Janz, M., Rodig, S., and Rajewsky, K. (2012). The
cell-cycle regulator c-Myc is essential for the formation and maintenance of
germinal centers. Nat. Immunol. 13, 1092–1100 .
Chan, T.D., Gatto, D., Wood, K., Camidge, T., Basten, A., and Brink, R. (2009).
Antigen afﬁnity controls rapid T-dependent antibody production by driving the
expansion rather than the differentiation or extrafollicular migration of early
plasmablasts. J. Immunol. 183, 3139–3149 .
Chan, T.D., Wood, K., Hermes, J.R., Butt, D., Jolly, C.J., Basten, A., and Brink,
R. (2012). Elimination of germinal-center-derived self-reactive B cells is gov-
erned by the location and concentration of self-antigen. Immunity 37, 893–904 .Chou, C., Verbaro, D.J., Tonc, E., Holmgren, M., Cella, M., Colonna, M., Bhat-
tacharya, D., and Egawa, T. (2016). The transcription factor AP4 mediates res-
olution of chronic viral infection through ampliﬁcation of germinal center B cell
responses. Immunity 45, this issue, 570–582 .
Chung, Y., Tanaka, S., Chu, F., Nurieva, R.I., Martinez, G.J., Rawal, S., Wang,
Y.H., Lim, H., Reynolds, J.M., Zhou, X.H., et al. (2011). Follicular regulatory
T cells expressing Foxp3 and Bcl-6 suppress germinal center reactions. Nat.
Med. 17, 983–988 .
Coffey, F., Alabyev, B., and Manser, T. (2009). Initial clonal expansion of
germinal center B cells takes place at the perimeter of follicles. Immunity 30,
599–609 .
Crotty, S. (2014). T follicular helper cell differentiation, function, and roles in
disease. Immunity 41, 529–542 .
Cyster, J.G. (2010). B cell follicles and antigen encounters of the third kind. Nat.
Immunol. 11, 989–996 .
Cyster, J.G., and Schwab, S.R. (2012). Sphingosine-1-phosphate and lympho-
cyte egress from lymphoid organs. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 69–94 .
Dal Porto, J.M., Haberman, A.M., Shlomchik, M.J., and Kelsoe, G. (1998). An-
tigen drives very low afﬁnity B cells to become plasmacytes and enter germinalcenters. J. Immunol. 161, 5373–5381 .
De Silva, N.S., and Klein, U. (2015). Dynamics of B cells in germinal centres.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 137–148 .
Di Niro, R., Lee, S.J., Vander Heiden, J.A., Elsner, R.A., Trivedi, N., Bannock,
J.M., Gupta, N.T., Kleinstein, S.H., Vigneault, F., Gilbert, T.J., et al. (2015). Sal-
monella infection drives promiscuous B cell activation followed by extrafollic-
ular afﬁnity maturation. Immunity 43, 120–131 .
Dogan, I., Bertocci, B., Vilmont, V., Delbos, F., Me ´gret, J., Storck, S., Reynaud,
C.A., and Weill, J.C. (2009). Multiple layers of B cell memory with differenteffector functions. Nat. Immunol. 10, 1292–1299 .
Dominguez-Sola, D., Victora, G.D., Ying, C.Y., Phan, R.T., Saito, M., Nussenz-
weig, M.C., and Dalla-Favera, R. (2012). The proto-oncogene MYC is required
for selection in the germinal center and cyclic reentry. Nat. Immunol. 13, 1083–
1091 .
Dominguez-Sola, D., Kung, J., Holmes, A.B., Wells, V.A., Mo, T., Basso, K.,
and Dalla-Favera, R. (2015). The FOXO1 transcription factor instructs the
germinal center dark zone program. Immunity 43, 1064–1074 .
Duchez, S., Amin, R., Cogne ´, N., Delpy, L., Sirac, C., Pascal, V., Corthe
´sy, B.,
and Cogne ´, M. (2010). Premature replacement of mu with alpha immunoglob-
ulin chains impairs lymphopoiesis and mucosal homing but promotes plasmacell maturation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 3064–3069 .
Duffy, K.R., Wellard, C.J., Markham, J.F., Zhou, J.H., Holmberg, R., Hawkins,
E.D., Hasbold, J., Dowling, M.R., and Hodgkin, P.D. (2012). Activation-induced
B cell fates are selected by intracellular stochastic competition. Science 335,
338–341 .
Eisen, H.N. (2014). Afﬁnity enhancement of antibodies: how low-afﬁnity
antibodies produced early in immune responses are followed by high-afﬁnity
antibodies later and in memory B-cell responses. Cancer Immunol. Res. 2,
381–392 .
Eisen, H.N., and Siskind, G.W. (1964). Variations in afﬁnities of antibodies
during the immune response. Biochemistry 3, 996–1008 .
Erazo, A., Kutchukhidze, N., Leung, M., Christ, A.P., Urban, J.F., Jr., Curotto
de Lafaille, M.A., and Lafaille, J.J. (2007). Unique maturation program of theIgE response in vivo. Immunity 26, 191–203 .
Falini, B., Fizzotti, M., Pucciarini, A., Bigerna, B., Maraﬁoti, T., Gambacorta, M.,
Pacini, R., Alunni, C., Natali-Tanci, L., Ugolini, B., et al. (2000). A monoclonal
antibody (MUM1p) detects expression of the MUM1/IRF4 protein in a subset
of germinal center B cells, plasma cells, and activated T cells. Blood 95,
2084–2092 .
Garin, A., Meyer-Hermann, M., Contie, M., Figge, M.T., Buatois, V., Gunzer,
M., Toellner, K.M., Elson, G., and Kosco-Vilbois, M.H. (2010). Toll-like receptor
4 signaling by follicular dendritic cells is pivotal for germinal center onset and
afﬁnity maturation. Immunity 33, 84–95 .
Immunity 45, September 20, 2016 479Immunity
Review

Garside, P., Ingulli, E., Merica, R.R., Johnson, J.G., Noelle, R.J., and Jenkins,
M.K. (1998). Visualization of speciﬁc B and T lymphocyte interactions in the
lymph node. Science 281, 96–99 .
Gatto, D., Paus, D., Basten, A., Mackay, C.R., and Brink, R. (2009). Guidance
of B cells by the orphan G protein-coupled receptor EBI2 shapes humoral im-
mune responses. Immunity 31, 259–269 .
Gatto, D., Wood, K., and Brink, R. (2011). EBI2 operates independently of but
in cooperation with CXCR5 and CCR7 to direct B cell migration and organiza-
tion in follicles and the germinal center. J. Immunol. 187, 4621–4628 .
Gitlin, A.D., Shulman, Z., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2014). Clonal selection in the
germinal centre by regulated proliferation and hypermutation. Nature 509,
637–640 .
Gitlin, A.D., Mayer, C.T., Oliveira, T.Y., Shulman, Z., Jones, M.J., Koren, A., and
Nussenzweig, M.C. (2015). HUMORAL IMMUNITY. T cell help controls the
speed of the cell cycle in germinal center B cells. Science 349, 643–646 .
Gitlin, A.D., von Boehmer, L., Gazumyan, A., Shulman, Z., Oliveira, T.Y., and
Nussenzweig, M.C. (2016). Independent roles of switching and hypermutation
in the development and persistence of B lymphocyte memory. Immunity 44,
769–781 .
Goenka, R., Matthews, A.H., Zhang, B., O’Neill, P.J., Scholz, J.L., Migone,
T.S., Leonard, W.J., Stohl, W., Hershberg, U., and Cancro, M.P. (2014). Local
BLyS production by T follicular cells mediates retention of high afﬁnity B cells
during afﬁnity maturation. J. Exp. Med. 211, 45–56 .
Gonzalez, S.F., Degn, S.E., Pitcher, L.A., Woodruff, M., Heesters, B.A., and
Carroll, M.C. (2011). Trafﬁcking of B cell antigen in lymph nodes. Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 29, 215–233 .
Good-Jacobson, K.L., Chen, Y., Voss, A.K., Smyth, G.K., Thomas, T., and Tar-
linton, D. (2014). Regulation of germinal center responses and B-cell memory
by the chromatin modiﬁer MOZ. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 9585–9590 .
Green, J.A., and Cyster, J.G. (2012). S1PR2 links germinal center conﬁnement
and growth regulation. Immunol. Rev. 247, 36–51 .
Green, J.A., Suzuki, K., Cho, B., Willison, L.D., Palmer, D., Allen, C.D.,
Schmidt, T.H., Xu, Y., Proia, R.L., Coughlin, S.R., and Cyster, J.G. (2011).
The sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor S1P 2maintains the homeostasis of
germinal center B cells and promotes niche conﬁnement. Nat. Immunol. 12,
672–680 .
Han, S., Zheng, B., Dal Porto, J., and Kelsoe, G. (1995). In situ studies of
the primary immune response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl. IV. Afﬁnity-dependent, antigen-driven B cell apoptosis in germinal centers as a mecha-
nism for maintaining self-tolerance. J. Exp. Med. 182, 1635–1644 .
Hannedouche, S., Zhang, J., Yi, T., Shen, W., Nguyen, D., Pereira, J.P., Gue-
rini, D., Baumgarten, B.U., Roggo, S., Wen, B., et al. (2011). Oxysterols direct
immune cell migration via EBI2. Nature 475, 524–527 .
He, J.S., Meyer-Hermann, M., Xiangying, D., Zuan, L.Y., Jones, L.A., Ramak-
rishna, L., de Vries, V.C., Dolpady, J., Aina, H., Joseph, S., et al. (2013). The
distinctive germinal center phase of IgE+ B lymphocytes limits their contribu-
tion to the classical memory response. J. Exp. Med. 210, 2755–2771 .
He, J.S., Narayanan, S., Subramaniam, S., Ho, W.Q., Lafaille, J.J., and Curotto
de Lafaille, M.A. (2015). Biology of IgE production: IgE cell differentiation and
the memory of IgE responses. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 388, 1–19 .
Heesters, B.A., Chatterjee, P., Kim, Y.A., Gonzalez, S.F., Kuligowski, M.P.,
Kirchhausen, T., and Carroll, M.C. (2013). Endocytosis and recycling of im-
mune complexes by follicular dendritic cells enhances B cell antigen binding
and activation. Immunity 38, 1164–1175 .
Heesters, B.A., Myers, R.C., and Carroll, M.C. (2014). Follicular dendritic cells:
dynamic antigen libraries. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 495–504 .
Heise, N., De Silva, N.S., Silva, K., Carette, A., Simonetti, G., Pasparakis, M.,
and Klein, U. (2014). Germinal center B cell maintenance and differentiation
are controlled by distinct NF- kB transcription factor subunits. J. Exp. Med.
211, 2103–2118 .
Jacob, J., Kassir, R., and Kelsoe, G. (1991a). In situ studies of the primary im-
mune response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl. I. The architecture and dy-
namics of responding cell populations. J. Exp. Med. 173, 1165–1175 .Jacob, J., Kelsoe, G., Rajewsky, K., and Weiss, U. (1991b). Intraclonal gener-
ation of antibody mutants in germinal centres. Nature 354, 389–392 .
Jacob, J., Przylepa, J., Miller, C., and Kelsoe, G. (1993). In situ studies of the
primary immune response to (4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl. III. The kinetics
of V region mutation and selection in germinal center B cells. J. Exp. Med. 178,
1293–1307 .
Jang, K.J., Mano, H., Aoki, K., Hayashi, T., Muto, A., Nambu, Y., Takahashi, K.,
Itoh, K., Taketani, S., Nutt, S.L., et al. (2015). Mitochondrial function provides
instructive signals for activation-induced B-cell fates. Nat. Commun. 6, 6750 .
Kasturi, S.P., Skountzou, I., Albrecht, R.A., Koutsonanos, D., Hua, T., Nakaya,
H.I., Ravindran, R., Stewart, S., Alam, M., Kwissa, M., et al. (2011). Program-ming the magnitude and persistence of antibody responses with innate immu-
nity. Nature 470, 543–547 .
Kelly, L.M., Pereira, J.P., Yi, T., Xu, Y., and Cyster, J.G. (2011). EBI2 guides
serial movements of activated B cells and ligand activity is detectable in
lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissues. J. Immunol. 187, 3026–3032 .
Kepler, T.B., and Perelson, A.S. (1993). Cyclic re-entry of germinal center B
cells and the efﬁciency of afﬁnity maturation. Immunol. Today 14, 412–415 .
Khalil, A.M., Cambier, J.C., and Shlomchik, M.J. (2012). B cell receptor signal
transduction in the GC is short-circuited by high phosphatase activity. Science
336, 1178–1181 .
Klein, F., Diskin, R., Scheid, J.F., Gaebler, C., Mouquet, H., Georgiev, I.S., Pan-
cera, M., Zhou, T., Incesu, R.B., Fu, B.Z., et al. (2013). Somatic mutations of the
immunoglobulin framework are generally required for broad and potent HIV-1
neutralization. Cell
153, 126–138 .
Kometani, K., Nakagawa, R., Shinnakasu, R., Kaji, T., Rybouchkin, A., Mor-
iyama, S., Furukawa, K., Koseki, H., Takemori, T., and Kurosaki, T. (2013).
Repression of the transcription factor Bach2 contributes to predisposition ofIgG1 memory B cells toward plasma cell differentiation. Immunity 39, 136–147 .
Kroese, F.G., Wubbena, A.S., Seijen, H.G., and Nieuwenhuis, P. (1987).
Germinal centers develop oligoclonally. Eur. J. Immunol. 17, 1069–1072 .
Ku¨ppers, R., Zhao, M., Hansmann, M.L., and Rajewsky, K. (1993). Tracing B
cell development in human germinal centres by molecular analysis of single
cells picked from histological sections. EMBO J. 12, 4955–4967 .
Kuraoka, M., Schmidt, A.G., Nojima, T., Feng, F., Watanabe, A., Kitamura, D.,
Harrison, S.C., Kepler, T.B., and Kelsoe, G. (2016). Complex antigens drive
permissive clonal selection in germinal centers. Immunity 44, 542–552 .
Kurosaki, T., Kometani, K., and Ise, W. (2015). Memory B cells. Nat. Rev. Im-
munol. 15, 149–159 .
Liao, H.X., Lynch, R., Zhou, T., Gao, F., Alam, S.M., Boyd, S.D., Fire, A.Z., Ros-
kin, K.M., Schramm, C.A., Zhang, Z., et al.; NISC Comparative Sequencing
Program (2013). Co-evolution of a broadly neutralizing HIV-1 antibody and
founder virus. Nature 496, 469–476 .
Lingwood, D., McTamney, P.M., Yassine, H.M., Whittle, J.R., Guo, X., Boying-
ton, J.C., Wei, C.J., and Nabel, G.J. (2012). Structural and genetic basis
for development of broadly neutralizing inﬂuenza antibodies. Nature 489,
566–570 .
Linterman, M.A., Pierson, W., Lee, S.K., Kallies, A., Kawamoto, S., Rayner,
T.F., Srivastava, M., Divekar, D.P., Beaton, L., Hogan, J.J., et al. (2011).
Foxp3+ follicular regulatory T cells control the germinal center response.
Nat. Med. 17, 975–982 .
Liu, Y.J., Joshua, D.E., Williams, G.T., Smith, C.A., Gordon, J., and
MacLennan, I.C. (1989). Mechanism of antigen-driven selection in germinal
centres. Nature 342, 929–931 .
Liu, Y.J., Zhang, J., Lane, P.J., Chan, E.Y., and MacLennan, I.C. (1991). Sites of
speciﬁc B cell activation in primary and secondary responses to T cell-depen-dent and T cell-independent antigens. Eur. J. Immunol. 21, 2951–2962 .
Liu, D., Xu, H., Shih, C., Wan, Z., Ma, X., Ma, W., Luo, D., and Qi, H. (2015). T-B-
cell entanglement and ICOSL-driven feed-forward regulation of germinal
centre reaction. Nature 517, 214–218 .
McHeyzer-Williams, L.J., Milpied, P.J., Okitsu, S.L., and McHeyzer-Williams,
M.G. (2015). Class-switched memory B cells remodel BCRs within secondary
germinal centers. Nat. Immunol. 16, 296–305 .
480 Immunity 45, September 20, 2016Immunity
Review

Meyer-Hermann, M.E., Maini, P.K., and Iber, D. (2006). An analysis of B cell se-
lection mechanisms in germinal centers. Math. Med. Biol. 23, 255–277 .
Meyer-Hermann, M., Mohr, E., Pelletier, N., Zhang, Y., Victora, G.D., and Toell-
ner, K.M. (2012). A theory of germinal center B cell selection, division, and exit.
Cell Rep. 2, 162–174 .
Minnich, M., Tagoh, H., Bo ¨nelt, P., Axelsson, E., Fischer, M., Cebolla, B., Tar-
akhovsky, A., Nutt, S.L., Jaritz, M., and Busslinger, M. (2016). Multifunctional
role of the transcription factor Blimp-1 in coordinating plasma cell differentia-
tion. Nat. Immunol. 17, 331–343 .
Moriyama, S., Takahashi, N., Green, J.A., Hori, S., Kubo, M., Cyster, J.G., and
Okada, T. (2014). Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 2 is critical for follicularhelper T cell retention in germinal centers. J. Exp. Med. 211, 1297–1305 .
Mueller, J., Matloubian, M., and Zikherman, J. (2015). Cutting edge: An in vivo
reporter reveals active B cell receptor signaling in the germinal center.
J. Immunol. 194, 2993–2997 .
Muppidi, J.R., Schmitz, R., Green, J.A., Xiao, W., Larsen, A.B., Braun, S.E., An,
J., Xu, Y., Rosenwald, A., Ott, G., et al. (2014). Loss of signalling via G a13 in
germinal centre B-cell-derived lymphoma. Nature 516, 254–258 .
Muppidi, J.R., Lu, E., and Cyster, J.G. (2015). The G protein-coupled receptor
P2RY8 and follicular dendritic cells promote germinal center conﬁnement of B
cells, whereas S1PR3 can contribute to their dissemination. J. Exp. Med. 212,
2213–2222 .
Muramatsu, M., Kinoshita, K., Fagarasan, S., Yamada, S., Shinkai, Y., and
Honjo, T. (2000). Class switch recombination and hypermutation require acti-
vation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a potential RNA editing enzyme. Cell
102, 553–563 .
Muto, A., Ochiai, K., Kimura, Y., Itoh-Nakadai, A., Calame, K.L., Ikebe, D., Ta-
shiro, S., and Igarashi, K. (2010). Bach2 represses plasma cell gene regulatorynetwork in B cells to promote antibody class switch. EMBO J. 29, 4048–4061 .
Natkanski, E., Lee, W.Y., Mistry, B., Casal, A., Molloy, J.E., and Tolar, P. (2013).
B cells use mechanical energy to discriminate antigen afﬁnities. Science 340,
1587–1590 .
Nie, Y., Waite, J., Brewer, F., Sunshine, M.J., Littman, D.R., and Zou, Y.R.
(2004). The role of CXCR4 in maintaining peripheral B cell compartments
and humoral immunity. J. Exp. Med. 200, 1145–1156 .
Nojima, T., Haniuda, K., Moutai, T., Matsudaira, M., Mizokawa, S., Shiratori, I.,
Azuma, T., and Kitamura, D. (2011). In-vitro derived germinal centre B cells
differentially generate memory B or plasma cells in vivo. Nat. Commun. 2,4 6 5 .
Nowosad, C.R., Spillane, K.M., and Tolar, P. (2016). Germinal center B cells
recognize antigen through a specialized immune synapse architecture. Nat.
Immunol. 17, 870–877 .
Nutt, S.L., Hodgkin, P.D., Tarlinton, D.M., and Corcoran, L.M. (2015). The gen-
eration of antibody-secreting plasma cells. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 160–171 .
Okada, T., Miller, M.J., Parker, I., Krummel, M.F., Neighbors, M., Hartley, S.B.,
O’Garra, A., Cahalan, M.D., and Cyster, J.G. (2005). Antigen-engaged B cells
undergo chemotaxis toward the T zone and form motile conjugates with helperT cells. PLoS Biol. 3, e150 .
Oprea, M., and Perelson, A.S. (1997). Somatic mutation leads to efﬁcient afﬁn-
ity maturation when centrocytes recycle back to centroblasts. J. Immunol.
158, 5155–5162 .
Pappas, L., Foglierini, M., Piccoli, L., Kallewaard, N.L., Turrini, F., Silacci, C.,
Fernandez-Rodriguez, B., Agatic, G., Giacchetto-Sasselli, I., Pellicciotta, G.,
et al. (2014). Rapid development of broadly inﬂuenza neutralizing antibodies
through redundant mutations. Nature
516, 418–422 .
Paus, D., Phan, T.G., Chan, T.D., Gardam, S., Basten, A., and Brink, R. (2006).
Antigen recognition strength regulates the choice between extrafollicularplasma cell and germinal center B cell differentiation. J. Exp. Med. 203,
1081–1091 .
Pereira, J.P., Kelly, L.M., Xu, Y., and Cyster, J.G. (2009). EBI2 mediates B cell
segregation between the outer and centre follicle. Nature 460, 1122–1126 .
Phan, T.G., Paus, D., Chan, T.D., Turner, M.L., Nutt, S.L., Basten, A., and Brink,
R. (2006). High afﬁnity germinal center B cells are actively selected into the
plasma cell compartment. J. Exp. Med. 203, 2419–2424 .Pulendran, B., Kannourakis, G., Nouri, S., Smith, K.G., and Nossal, G.J. (1995).
Soluble antigen can cause enhanced apoptosis of germinal-centre B cells. Na-
ture375, 331–334 .
Radmacher, M.D., Kelsoe, G., and Kepler, T.B. (1998). Predicted and inferred
waiting times for key mutations in the germinal centre reaction: evidence for
stochasticity in selection. Immunol. Cell Biol. 76, 373–381 .
Ramiscal, R.R., and Vinuesa, C.G. (2013). T-cell subsets in the germinal center.
Immunol. Rev. 252, 146–155 .
Robbiani, D.F., Deroubaix, S., Feldhahn, N., Oliveira, T.Y., Callen, E., Wang,
Q., Jankovic, M., Silva, I.T., Rommel, P.C., Bosque, D., et al. (2015). Plasmo-
dium infection promotes genomic instability and AID-dependent B cell lym-
phoma. Cell 162, 727–737 .
Rodda, L.B., Bannard, O., Ludewig, B., Nagasawa, T., and Cyster, J.G. (2015).
Phenotypic and morphological properties of germinal center dark zone
Cxcl12-expressing reticular cells. J. Immunol. 195, 4781–4791 .
Sabouri, Z., Schoﬁeld, P., Horikawa, K., Spierings, E., Kipling, D., Randall, K.L.,
Langley, D., Roome, B., Vazquez-Lombardi, R., Rouet, R., et al. (2014).
Redemption of autoantibodies on anergic B cells by variable-region glycosyl-ation and mutation away from self-reactivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,
E2567–E2575 .
Sage, P.T., and Sharpe, A.H. (2015). T follicular regulatory cells in the regula-
tion of B cell responses. Trends Immunol. 36, 410–418 .
Sander, S., Chu, V.T., Yasuda, T., Franklin, A., Graf, R., Calado, D.P., Li, S.,
Imami, K., Selbach, M., Di Virgilio, M., et al. (2015). PI3 kinase and FOXO1 tran-
scription factor activity differentially control B cells in the germinal center light
and dark zones. Immunity 43, 1075–1086 .
Schwickert, T.A., Lindquist, R.L., Shakhar, G., Livshits, G., Skokos, D., Kosco-
Vilbois, M.H., Dustin, M.L., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2007). In vivo imaging of
germinal centres reveals a dynamic open structure. Nature 446, 83–87 .
Schwickert, T.A., Alabyev, B., Manser, T., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2009).
Germinal center reutilization by newly activated B cells. J. Exp. Med. 206,
2907–2914 .
Schwickert, T.A., Victora, G.D., Fooksman, D.R., Kamphorst, A.O., Mugnier,
M.R., Gitlin, A.D., Dustin, M.L., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2011). A dynamic
T cell-limited checkpoint regulates afﬁnity-dependent B cell entry into thegerminal center. J. Exp. Med. 208, 1243–1252 .
Sciammas, R., Shaffer, A.L., Schatz, J.H., Zhao, H., Staudt, L.M., and Singh, H.
(2006). Graded expression of interferon regulatory factor-4 coordinates iso-
type switching with plasma cell differentiation. Immunity 25, 225–236 .
Shih, T.A., Roederer, M., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2002). Role of antigen re-
ceptor afﬁnity in T cell-independent antibody responses in vivo. Nat. Immunol.
3, 399–406 .
Shinnakasu, R., Inoue, T., Kometani, K., Moriyama, S., Adachi, Y., Nakayama,
M., Takahashi, Y., Fukuyama, H., Okada, T., and Kurosaki, T. (2016). Regu-
lated selection of germinal-center cells into the memory B cell compartment.
Nat. Immunol. 17, 861–869 .
Shlomchik, M.J., Marshak-Rothstein, A., Wolfowicz, C.B., Rothstein, T.L., and
Weigert, M.G. (1987). The role of clonal selection and somatic mutation in auto-
immunity. Nature 328, 805–811 .
Shokat, K.M., and Goodnow, C.C. (1995). Antigen-induced B-cell death and
elimination during germinal-centre immune responses. Nature 375, 334–338 .
Shulman, Z., Gitlin, A.D., Targ, S., Jankovic, M., Pasqual, G., Nussenzweig,
M.C., and Victora, G.D. (2013). T follicular helper cell dynamics in germinal
centers. Science 341, 673–677 .
Shulman, Z., Gitlin, A.D., Weinstein, J.S., Lainez, B., Esplugues, E., Flavell,
R.A., Craft, J.E., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2014). Dynamic signaling by T follic-
ular helper cells during germinal center B cell selection. Science 345, 1058–
1062 .
Smith, K.G., Light, A., Nossal, G.J., and Tarlinton, D.M. (1997). The extent of
afﬁnity maturation differs between the memory and antibody-forming cell
compartments in the primary immune response. EMBO J. 16, 2996–3006 .
Sutherland, D.B., Suzuki, K., and Fagarasan, S. (2016). Fostering of advanced
mutualism with gut microbiota by immunoglobulin A. Immunol. Rev. 270,
20–31 .
Immunity 45, September 20, 2016 481Immunity
Review

Talay, O., Yan, D., Brightbill, H.D., Straney, E.E., Zhou, M., Ladi, E., Lee, W.P.,
Egen, J.G., Austin, C.D., Xu, M., and Wu, L.C. (2012). IgE+memory B cells and
plasma cells generated through a germinal-center pathway. Nat. Immunol. 13,
396–404 .
Tan, J., Pieper, K., Piccoli, L., Abdi, A., Foglierini, M., Geiger, R., Tully, C.M.,
Jarrossay, D., Ndungu, F.M., Wambua, J., et al. (2016). A LAIR1 insertion gen-erates broadly reactive antibodies against malaria variant antigens. Nature
529, 105–109 .
Tarlinton, D., and Good-Jacobson, K. (2013). Diversity among memory B cells:
origin, consequences, and utility. Science 341, 1205–1211 .
Tas, J.M., Mesin, L., Pasqual, G., Targ, S., Jacobsen, J.T., Mano, Y.M., Chen,
C.S., Weill, J.C., Reynaud, C.A., Browne, E.P., et al. (2016). Visualizing anti-
body afﬁnity maturation in germinal centers. Science 351, 1048–1054 .
Taylor, J.J., Pape, K.A., Steach, H.R., and Jenkins, M.K. (2015). Humoral im-
munity. Apoptosis and antigen afﬁnity limit effector cell differentiation of a sin-
gle naı ¨veB cell. Science 347, 784–787 .
Tellier, J., Shi, W., Minnich, M., Liao, Y., Crawford, S., Smyth, G.K., Kallies, A.,
Busslinger, M., and Nutt, S.L. (2016). Blimp-1 controls plasma cell functionthrough the regulation of immunoglobulin secretion and the unfolded protein
response. Nat. Immunol. 17, 323–330 .
Tew, J.G., and Mandel, T.E. (1979). Prolonged antigen half-life in the lymphoid
follicles of speciﬁcally immunized mice. Immunology 37, 69–76 .
Thaunat, O., Granja, A.G., Barral, P., Filby, A., Montaner, B., Collinson, L., Mar-
tinez-Martin, N., Harwood, N.E., Bruckbauer, A., and Batista, F.D. (2012).
Asymmetric segregation of polarized antigen on B cell division shapes presen-
tation capacity. Science 335, 475–479 .
Tiller, T., Tsuiji, M., Yurasov, S., Velinzon, K., Nussenzweig, M.C., and Warde-
mann, H. (2007). Autoreactivity in human IgG+ memory B cells. Immunity 26,
205–213 .
Tiller, T., Kofer, J., Kreschel, C., Busse, C.E., Riebel, S., Wickert, S., Oden, F.,
Mertes, M.M., Ehlers, M., and Wardemann, H. (2010). Development of
self-reactive germinal center B cells and plasma cells in autoimmune Fc
gammaRIIB-deﬁcient mice. J. Exp. Med. 207, 2767–2778 .
Turner, C.A., Jr., Mack, D.H., and Davis, M.M. (1994). Blimp-1, a novel zinc
ﬁnger-containing protein that can drive the maturation of B lymphocytes intoimmunoglobulin-secreting cells. Cell 77, 297–306 .
Victora, G.D., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2012). Germinal centers. Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 30, 429–457 .
Victora, G.D., and Wilson, P.C. (2015). Germinal center selection and the anti-
body response to inﬂuenza. Cell 163, 545–548 .
Victora, G.D., Schwickert, T.A., Fooksman, D.R., Kamphorst, A.O., Meyer-
Hermann, M., Dustin, M.L., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2010). Germinal centerdynamics revealed by multiphoton microscopy with a photoactivatable ﬂuo-
rescent reporter. Cell 143, 592–605 .
Victora, G.D., Dominguez-Sola, D., Holmes, A.B., Deroubaix, S., Dalla-Favera,
R., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2012). Identiﬁcation of human germinal center
light and dark zone cells and their relationship to human B-cell lymphomas.
Blood 120, 2240–2248 .
Vinuesa, C.G., Cook, M.C., Angelucci, C., Athanasopoulos, V., Rui, L., Hill,
K.M., Yu, D., Domaschenz, H., Whittle, B., Lambe, T., et al. (2005). A RING-
type ubiquitin ligase family member required to repress follicular helper
T cells and autoimmunity. Nature 435, 452–458 .
Vinuesa, C.G., Linterman, M.A., Yu, D., and MacLennan, I.C. (2016). Follicular
helper T cells. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 34, 335–368
.
Wang, X., Cho, B., Suzuki, K., Xu, Y., Green, J.A., An, J., and Cyster, J.G.
(2011). Follicular dendritic cells help establish follicle identity and promote B
cell retention in germinal centers. J. Exp. Med. 208, 2497–2510 .
Weigert, M.G., Cesari, I.M., Yonkovich, S.J., and Cohn, M. (1970). Variability in
the lambda light chain sequences of mouse antibody. Nature 228, 1045–1047 .
Weisel, F.J., Zuccarino-Catania, G.V., Chikina, M., and Shlomchik, M.J. (2016).
A temporal switch in the germinal center determines differential output of
memory B and plasma cells. Immunity 44, 116–130 .
Wollenberg, I., Agua-Doce, A., Herna ´ndez, A., Almeida, C., Oliveira, V.G., Faro,
J., and Graca, L. (2011). Regulation of the germinal center reaction by Foxp3+follicular regulatory T cells. J. Immunol. 187, 4553–4560 .
Xiong, H., Dolpady, J., Wabl, M., Curotto de Lafaille, M.A., and Lafaille, J.J.
(2012). Sequential class switching is required for the generation of high afﬁnity
IgE antibodies. J. Exp. Med. 209, 353–364 .
Xu, Y., Xu, L., Zhao, M., Xu, C., Fan, Y., Pierce, S.K., and Liu, W. (2014). No re-
ceptor stands alone: IgG B-cell receptor intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms
contribute to antibody memory. Cell Res. 24, 651–664 .
Yang, Z., Sullivan, B.M., and Allen, C.D. (2012). Fluorescent in vivo detection
reveals that IgE(+) B cells are restrained by an intrinsic cell fate predisposition.
Immunity 36, 857–872 .
Zhang, Y., Meyer-Hermann, M., George, L.A., Figge, M.T., Khan, M., Goodall,
M., Young, S.P., Reynolds, A., Falciani, F., Waisman, A., et al. (2013). Germinal
center B cells govern their own fate via antibody feedback. J. Exp. Med. 210,
457–464 .
Ziegner, M., Steinhauser, G., and Berek, C. (1994). Development of antibody
diversity in single germinal centers: selective expansion of high-afﬁnity vari-
ants. Eur. J. Immunol. 24, 2393–2400 .
Zikherman, J., Parameswaran, R., and Weiss, A. (2012). Endogenous antigen
tunes the responsiveness of naive B cells but not T cells. Nature 489, 160–164 .
482 Immunity 45, September 20, 2016Immunity
Review