--- Page 1 ---
WINOGRADSKY REVIEW
Experimental evolution and the dynamics of
adaptation and genome evolution in microbial
populations
Richard E Lenski1,2,3
1Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA;
2Graduate Program in Ecology, Evolutionary Biology and Behavior, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI, USA and 3BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI, USA
Evolution is an on-going process, and it can be studied experimentally in organisms with rapid
generations. My team has maintained 12 populations of Escherichia coli in a simple laboratory
environment for 425 years and 60 000 generations. We have quantified the dynamics of adaptation by
natural selection, seen some of the populations diverge into stably coexisting ecotypes, described
changes in the bacteria’s mutation rate, observed the new ability to exploit a previously untapped
carbon source, characterized the dynamics of genome evolution and used parallel evolution to
identify the genetic targets of selection. I discuss what the future might hold for this particular
experiment, briefly highlight some other microbial evolution experiments and suggest how the fields
of experimental evolution and microbial ecology might intersect going forward.
The ISME Journal (2017) 11, 2181–2194; doi:10.1038/ismej.2017.69; published online 16 May 2017
The distinction between ‘ecological time’ and
‘evolutionary time’ is artificial and misleading.
Changes of both kinds may be on any time scale:
frequently genetic and ecological changes are
simultaneous—Janis Antonovics (1976).
Introduction
Evolution is often viewed as an inexorably slow
process, one that happens over extremely long
periods. By contrast, ecology is typically seen as
occurring much faster, reflecting both the intrinsic
dynamics of biotic interactions and the increasingly
pervasive effects of anthropogenic environmental
change. In fact, however, evolution is simply the
conjunction of ecology and genetics, which involve a
few basic processes—births, deaths, competition,
mutation and selection—that have been happening
since life began and will continue for as long as life
exists.
On-going evolution has been studied in such
organisms as finches in the Galapagos archipelago
(Grant and Grant, 2014) and fruit flies in the
laboratory (Burke et al., 2010). But nowhere is
evolution in action more apparent than in micro-
organisms. Examples include such striking and
impactful changes as antibiotic resistance in bacteria
and altered host-range in viruses, as well as subtle
changes that allow the spread of pathogens to be
tracked by epidemiologists or that produce microbes
slightly better adapted to their environments than
their predecessors.
In this review, I will focus mostly on an experi-
mental study in which a single bacterial species has
been evolving under constant conditions for many
years. Such ‘pure culture’ studies have sometimes
been criticized because they eliminate the richness
and complexity of the natural world. I cannot
dispute that point. However, science often pro-
gresses by simplifying nature in order to probe and
make sense of more tractable systems. Moreover, one
of the most striking outcomes of the experiment has
been the richness and complexity that have emerged.
The long-term evolution experiment
Structure of the experiment and motivating questions
The long-term evolution experiment, or LTEE, is
simple both conceptually and practically. Twelve
populations were started the same ancestral strain of
Escherichia coli in 1988. The ancestral strain has no
plasmids or functional prophages, and E. coli is not
naturally transformable, so there is no horizontal
gene
transfer.
However,
each
population
has
Correspondence: RE Lenski, Department of Microbiology and
Molecular
Genetics,
Michigan
State
University,
Biomedical
Physical Sciences Building, 567 Wilson Road, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA.
E-mail: lenski@msu.edu
Received 21 December 2016; revised 2 March 2017; accepted
10 March 2017; published online 16 May 2017
The ISME Journal (2017) 11, 2181–2194
© 2017 International Society for Microbial Ecology All rights reserved 1751-7362/17
www.nature.com/ismej


--- Page 2 ---
millions of cells that provide a continual supply of
new mutations. The populations are propagated in a
glucose-limited minimal salts medium at 37 °C by
transferring 1% of the volume into fresh medium
every day. The 100-fold dilution and resulting
regrowth allows log2 100≈6.7 generations each day.
Samples
from
each population
are
periodically
stored at −80 °C, where they are available for later
study. Importantly, the frozen cells remain viable,
such that changes in performance can be analyzed at
later times; and when accidents occur, the popula-
tions are restarted from the most recent whole-
population samples. As of this writing, the LTEE
has passed 66 000 generations.
Since
its
inception,
the
LTEE
has
examined
several overarching questions (Lenski et al., 1991).
Is the process of adaptation by natural selection
invariably slow and gradual, or are there periods of
rapid change and stasis? Does fitness eventually
reach
some
maximum
level,
or
can
organisms
continue to improve indefinitely, even in a constant
environment? Will the replicate populations achieve
the same fitness peaks, or will some discover better
solutions than others? If fitness trajectories evolve in
parallel, does that imply the same underlying genetic
changes? How are phenotypic and genetic evolution
coupled, both dynamically and functionally?
Dynamics of adaptation by natural selection
We can directly measure the extent of adaption by
natural selection by competing bacteria from a later-
generation
sample
against
the
ancestral
strain.
Relative fitness is expressed as the ratio of the
realized growth rates of the evolved and ancestral
bacteria as they compete with one another. Unless
otherwise stated, the competitions are performed in
the same medium and conditions as the LTEE;
however, we can also vary the conditions to examine
how that affects performance. The competitions
usually begin with an equal mix of ancestral and
evolved bacteria, but we sometimes vary the starting
ratio to look for more complex frequency-dependent
interactions. Of course, we must be able to distin-
guish the ancestral and evolved bacteria to enumer-
ate them and calculate their realized growth rates. To
that end, we use two variants of the ancestral strain
that differ by a genetic marker that allows us to
distinguish the competitors; the marker is neutral
(that is, does not affect fitness) under the conditions
of the LTEE. Before the ancestral and evolved
competitors are mixed, both have been frozen,
thawed and grown separately for a full transfer cycle
under the conditions where they will compete. This
acclimation ensures that any significant differences
in competitive fitness reflect genetic differences
rather
than
non-heritable
differences
in
physiological state.
Looking at the fitness trajectory for one population
over
the
first
2000
generations
(Lenski
and
Travisano, 1994), we see that fitness increased by
~ 30% (Figure 1a). The rise appears to involve three
discrete steps of ~ 10% each. This pattern closely
matches the dynamic one expects in a large, initially
homogeneous asexual population. Consider a muta-
tion that confers a 10% benefit. Assuming it is not
lost to random genetic drift while it is rare, then it
takes ~ 250 generations for that mutation to become
the majority. For most of that time the mutant
remains a tiny minority because, assuming a con-
stant growth-rate differential, the ratio of the mutant
to its progenitor changes exponentially. Therefore,
the fitness trajectory, at least in the early generations,
is dominated by sequential selective sweeps of a few
mutations with large beneficial effects. Other bene-
ficial mutations occur as well, but they are out-
competed
by
the
most
beneficial
ones,
a
phenomenon
called
clonal
interference
(Gerrish
and Lenski, 1998; Maddamsetti et al., 2015). When
clones from this population were sequenced, five
mutations were found and each mutation was shown
to be beneficial (Khan et al., 2011). The fact that
there were five beneficial mutations, despite only
three step-like increases in fitness, indicates that
some sweeps involved multiple beneficial mutations
(Lang et al., 2013; Maddamsetti et al., 2015).
Figure 1
Fitness trajectories of evolving E. coli populations. (a) Fitness trajectory for one population, Ara–1, relative to its ancestor over
the first 2000 generations of the LTEE. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals based on replicated assays. The line segments show the fit
of a step model to the data. Modified from Lenski and Travisano (1994). (b) Trajectory for the grand-mean fitness across the LTEE
populations over 50 000 generations. Error bars are 95% confidence limits based on replicate populations. The curve shows the fit of a
power-law model. Modified from Wiser et al. (2013).
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2182
The ISME Journal


--- Page 3 ---
We have also characterized the grand-mean fitness
trajectory
across
the
replicate
populations
and
50 000 generations (Wiser et al., 2013). Over this
timeframe, the bacteria reached a relative fitness of
~ 1.7, meaning they grew ~ 70% faster than their
ancestor when competing in the LTEE environment
(Figure 1b). Their rate of improvement slows over
time, as it becomes more difficult to achieve further
gains after taking the low-hanging fruit. Does this
slowdown imply that the bacteria have, or eventually
will, hit some limit on their fitness? Wiser et al.
(2013) compared the fit of two simple models with
these data, each of which has two free parameters.
One model, a rectangular hyperbola, has an asymp-
tote. The other model, a power-law, has no upper
bound, but the rate of increase declines with the
logarithm of time. Both models fit the data well, but
the power-law model fits the data better. Moreover,
the power-law relation is much better at predicting
the future than the hyperbolic model. When a
truncated data set was used to predict the future
trajectory,
the
hyperbolic
model
systematically
underestimated the potential for further fitness gains.
By contrast, the power-law model predicted with
impressive accuracy the improvement out to 50 000
generations using only 5000 generations of data
(Wiser et al., 2013).
The power-law model has no upper bound, and so
one might reasonably worry that it predicts the
bacteria will eventually grow at a rate that is
biophysically implausible. However, it does not
predict implausible growth rates for the foreseeable
future because the rate of improvement scales with
the logarithm of time. The ancestral strain used to
found the populations had a doubling time of
~ 55 min in the glucose-limited minimal medium of
the LTEE (Vasi et al., 1994). Wiser et al. (2013)
extrapolated the model to 2.5 billion generations,
which corresponds to 50 000 generations of scien-
tists running the LTEE for 50 000 generations each.
At
that
point,
the
projected
doubling
time
is
~ 23 min.
That
value
would
be
impressive
for
bacteria growing in a minimal medium, but it is no
faster than many E. coli strains can grow in nutrient-
rich media, and some species can grow even faster.
Thus, the power-law model generates plausible
predictions far into the future.
One might also ask whether it is appropriate to
base inferences about the dynamics of adaptation on
competitions against an ancestor that is increasingly
distant in time. This approach implicitly assumes
that relative fitnesses are transitive; for example, if
strain B is 10% more fit than strain A, and strain C is
10% more fit than B, then we expect C to be 21%
more fit than A when relative fitnesses are multi-
plicative.
In
most
natural
circumstances,
this
assumption would be unreasonable over long peri-
ods, and it would not be met in many laboratory
systems
with
complex
ecological
feedbacks
mediated by predators, secreted metabolites and
the like. However, this assumption appears to be
valid in the LTEE, at least to a first approximation
and in most cases, based on assays involving
competitors from different generations (de Visser
and Lenski, 2002). The extreme simplicity of the
LTEE environment undoubtedly accounts for the
transitivity; in particular, the low concentration of
glucose limits the population density, which in turn
limits
the
accumulation
of
by-products
in
the
medium. Nonetheless, as discussed below, subtle
frequency-dependent
interactions
involving
by-
products have arisen in some populations, but they
have fitness effects that are small in comparison with
the overall gains in fitness relative to the ancestor. In
any case, to the extent that fitness trajectories based
on competition against the ancestor are inaccurate,
they should generally underestimate the extent of
continuing adaptation (Wiser et al., 2013). That is
because genotypes that systematically increase in
frequency in large populations must be more fit than
those they replace, but that need not be the case
relative to some type that is no longer present
(Paquin and Adams, 1983).
Evolving complexity
The LTEE was designed to be simple. Having just
one species, one limiting resource and no spatial
structure should minimize complex ecological inter-
actions, and the absence of horizontal gene transfer
was meant to simplify genetic analyses. Nonetheless,
unexpected and interesting complexities arose spon-
taneously as a consequence of the bacteria evolving
within these narrow confines.
On the ecological front, one population, called
Ara–2, has diverged into two distinct lineages, called
L and S, which have coexisted for over 50 000
generations.
There
are
at
least
two
ways
that
coexistence could occur, even in this simple envir-
onment. First, one ecotype might grow faster at the
concentration of glucose available at the start of each
day, whereas the other type may grow relatively
faster as the concentration is drawn down. Second,
one type might be the superior competitor for the
glucose, whereas the other better uses some secreted
by-product, generating a cross-feeding interaction. In
population Ara–2, coexistence depends primarily on
the second mechanism. The L ecotype grows faster
on glucose, but it cannot grow in its own spent
medium, which the S type is able to use (Rozen and
Lenski, 2000). It appears that acetate is the main by-
product that supports the S lineage (Großkopf et al.,
2016). During the establishment of this polymorph-
ism, the L ecotype lost its ability to use acetate
whereas the S type improved that ability. As a result
of the trade-off between growth on glucose and
acetate, the two ecotypes can stably coexist. That is,
each type has a competitive advantage when rare,
but as its frequency increases, it loses its advantage.
However, evolution has continued in both lineages
(Le Gac et al., 2012). As one or the other acquired
new
beneficial
mutations,
they
perturbed
the
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2183
The ISME Journal


--- Page 4 ---
relationship, leading to large fluctuations in their
relative abundance over longer periods (Rozen and
Lenski, 2000). In principle, one ecotype might evolve
in such a way that it drives the other extinct, but that
has not yet happened in population Ara–2.
Other populations generated more transient poly-
morphisms (Maddamsetti et al., 2015). In population
Ara–1,
two
lineages
coexisted
from
~ 7000
to
~ 14 000 generations, before one drove the other
extinct (Figure 2). It is not known why the poly-
morphism in Ara–2 has persisted longer than those
in other populations, but a likely explanation is that
the L ecotype lost its ability to use acetate. In other
populations, the ecotype that is the better competitor
for glucose might retain its ability to use acetate. If
so, the advantage to a minority ecotype with better
growth on acetate would be less, and a smaller
improvement in the dominant type might be suffi-
cient to drive the minority type to extinction.
On
the
genetics
front,
complexity
arose
via
changes in the mutation rate (Sniegowski et al.,
1997; Barrick et al., 2009; Blount et al., 2012;
Tenaillon et al., 2016). Six populations evolved
hypermutability caused by mutations affecting either
DNA mismatch repair or the ability to remove certain
oxidized bases. The changes are not subtle, with
increases in the point mutation rate of ~ 100-fold,
although several populations later evolved reduced
hypermutability (Figure 3). The hypermutability
affects not only the mutation rate but also the
spectrum of base substitutions. In addition to the
populations that evolved higher point mutation
rates, population Ara+1 evolved increased activity
of a native transposable element, IS150, which led to
increased rates of insertion mutations as well as
chromosomal rearrangements (Papadopoulos et al.,
1999; Raeside et al., 2014; Tenaillon et al., 2016).
These
changes
complicate
genetic
analyses.
In particular, the increased mutation rates make it
more difficult to identify the ‘driver’ mutations that
improve fitness because they are surrounded by
many more ‘passenger’ mutations that are neutral or
even deleterious. (Nevertheless, by focusing on
populations that did not evolve hypermutability,
and other lineages before they became hypermuta-
ble, we can identify genetic targets of selection in the
LTEE. I will return to that topic in a later section).
The emergence of hypermutators raises the ques-
tions of how and why they evolve. At first glance,
they might seem to evolve because their higher
mutation rate speeds the process of adaptation by
natural selection. That explanation is correct, but
also incomplete. Beneficial mutations are only a
small fraction of all mutations, and a random
mutation is more likely to be deleterious than
beneficial. From that perspective, a bacterium with
an increased mutation rate has a disadvantage
because its progeny tend to be less fit. However,
natural selection depends not only on average fitness
Time (generations)
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
0
Relative Abundance
Figure 2
Muller plot showing the relative abundances of 42 mutations found in population Ara–1 during its first 20 000 generations. The
labels are names of the mutated genes; dots before the gene name indicate mutations that eventually fixed in the population. Note the
period between ~ 7000 and ~ 14 000 generations, when two major clades—one shown in shades of green, and the other in yellows and reds
—transiently coexisted before the latter eventually drove the former extinct. Coexistence was supported by a negative frequency-
dependent interaction, with the fluctuations evidently caused by beneficial mutations that gave one lineage or the other a temporary
advantage. Modified from Maddamsetti et al. (2015).
Figure 3
Changing mutation rate in population Ara–1. This
population maintained the low ancestral mutation rate for over
20 000 generations. It then evolved hypermutability that increased
its point mutation rate, with partial compensation later occurring
in parallel in two lineages within that population. Modified from
Wielgoss et al. (2013).
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2184
The ISME Journal


--- Page 5 ---
effects, but also on the variance in fitness, and a
hypermutable lineage may prevail if it produces the
next big winner. In an asexual population, the allele
that causes hypermutability is inherited along with
any beneficial mutation that a hypermutator happens
to produce, generating indirect selection for hyper-
mutability (Tenaillon et al., 2001). But if an allele that
causes hypermutability is usually at a disadvantage,
how does it become common enough to generate the
rare winner? In fact, most mutations that cause
hypermutability
will
never
produce
a
winner;
instead, they will go extinct. However, given recur-
rent mutations in the genes that encode the proteins
that perform mismatch repair and remove mutagenic
compounds, occasionally such a mutant will get
lucky before it goes extinct and produce a beneficial
mutation that more than offsets its harmful effect,
allowing the hypermutator to increase in frequency.
The probability that this happens depends on the
opportunity for beneficial mutations. As a general
tendency,
the further a
population
is
from
its
optimum, the more scope there is for improvement
and the greater the opportunity for beneficial muta-
tions
(Moore
et
al.,
2000;
Wilke
et
al.,
2003;
Kryazhimskiy et al., 2014). Consequently, when a
population encounters a new environment—such as
at the start of the LTEE—there are many opportu-
nities for hypermutators to generate beneficial muta-
tions
and
become
established.
Then,
as
the
population becomes better adapted to those condi-
tions, the opportunity for further improvement is
reduced while the cost of deleterious mutations
continues unabated. As a result, a lower mutation
rate may evolve once the fitness gain that results from
reducing the load of deleterious mutations becomes
greater than the gains associated with beneficial
mutations
that
the
hypermutator
can
generate
(Figure 3). In short, the mutation rate is subject to
an evolutionary tension between opposing effects
(Wielgoss et al., 2013; Good and Desai, 2016).
Innovation and contingency
The LTEE populations live in a medium with
glucose as the limiting resource. Citrate is also
present as a chelating agent, but most E. coli cannot
transport citrate into the cell when oxygen is present.
The inability to grow aerobically on citrate is one of
the defining features of E. coli as a species. Some
strains can consume citrate under anoxic conditions,
although
doing
so
involves
co-metabolism
and
requires another source of carbon and energy. After
~ 31 000 generations, however, bacteria in popula-
tion Ara–3 gained the ability to consume citrate in
the oxygen-rich LTEE environment (Blount et al.,
2008). Moreover, these Cit+ cells can grow on citrate
as a sole carbon source. This population was not
hypermutable when this new trait arose, although it
later evolved hypermutability. None of the other
populations has evolved this ability even after
465 000 generations. Given the population size,
number of generations, and ancestral mutation rate,
every point mutation has been tested many times
over in each population. Why, then, was it so
difficult to evolve the Cit+ phenotype?
One possibility is that the transition from Cit– to
Cit+ required multiple mutations, so that the right
genetic background had to be in place, after which
(and only after which) another mutation would yield
the new function. A second possibility is that some
rare type of mutation was necessary to produce the
Cit+ phenotype. These hypotheses are not mutually
exclusive; in fact, both factors contributed to the
difficulty of this transition under the conditions of
the LTEE. To examine the effect of genetic back-
ground, Blount et al. (2008) performed ‘replay’
experiments in which they attempted to evolve the
Cit+ phenotype starting from the ancestor and Cit–
clones isolated at various times. In light of the
difficulty of generating Cit+ mutants, most replays
involved plating large numbers of cells on an agar-
based medium that contained citrate but no glucose,
incubating the plates for several weeks, and seeing
whether any Cit+ mutants emerged. Although Cit+
mutants were very rare, the replays showed that
genetic context mattered: neither the ancestor nor
any clone that had been isolated before generation
20 000 produced any Cit+ mutants, but 17 mutants
arose from later clones. Thus, the origin of this new
function was historically contingent; that is, the
propensity to evolve the Cit+ phenotype depended
on one or more previous changes.
Whole-genome
sequencing
was
performed
to
identify the mutations responsible for the new
function (Blount et al., 2012). The ‘actualizing’
mutation that first produced a Cit+ cell was found
to be a tandem duplication involving a gene, citT,
which encodes a protein used to transport citrate in
the absence of oxygen. The effect of the duplication
was that the second copy of the gene was adjacent to
a
new
upstream
regulatory
region,
which
was
downstream of the original copy. As a consequence
of this ‘promoter capture’ event, the citT gene was
expressed in the presence of oxygen as glucose ran
out, allowing the cells to switch to growing on
citrate. All of the Cit+ mutants from the replay
experiments also had rearrangement mutations that
involve the citT gene and appear to enable expres-
sion from alternative promoters. Evidently, no point
mutation can generate growth on citrate, even in an
otherwise suitable genetic background. Moreover,
the relevant rearrangements must happen at very low
rates under the specific conditions of the LTEE. The
duplicated region then underwent further amplifica-
tion in population Ara–3, which increased its growth
on citrate (Blount et al., 2012).
To
see
how
genetic
context
affected
citrate
metabolism, the relevant module—the citT gene
and its newly captured regulatory region—were
moved onto a high-copy plasmid, which was then
transformed into four clonal backgrounds (Blount
et al., 2012). Three of the transformed clones,
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2185
The ISME Journal


--- Page 6 ---
including the ancestral strain, could grow on citrate
in the presence of oxygen, albeit with long delays
between the depletion of glucose and the start of
growth on citrate and other difficulties (Figure 4a).
By contrast, the transformant of a Cit– clone that was
closely related to the Cit+ lineage in population
Ara–3 made a seamless transition from glucose to
citrate and reached a high density (Figure 4b). These
results
indicate
epistasis
between
the
citrate-
transport module and genetic background. More
recent studies have identified chromosomal muta-
tions that, along with that module, enable vigorous
growth on citrate (Quandt et al., 2014, 2015).
As interesting as this function is from a genetics
perspective, it is equally interesting from an ecolo-
gical standpoint. When the Cit+ type evolved, it did
not drive the Cit– bacteria extinct, nor did the Cit+
bacteria lose their ability to grow on glucose; instead,
the two types coexisted for over 10 000 generations
before the Cit– lineage went extinct (Turner et al.,
2015). Coexistence was possible, in part, because the
Cit+ bacteria had a longer lag before growth than the
Cit– bacteria when they were transferred into fresh
medium (Blount et al., 2008). The Cit+ cells grew on
citrate before entering stationary phase, so they
probably had to change their metabolic state to a
greater extent than did the Cit– cells in order to grow
on glucose. Also, the evolution of Cit+ bacteria led to
even more complex ecological interactions as a
consequence of the biochemical mechanism they
use to obtain citrate. The citT gene encodes an
antiporter protein that, while bringing a citrate
molecule into the cell, exports a succinate, fumarate
or
malate
molecule
to
the
medium.
Citrate
is
energetically more valuable than these compounds,
but E. coli can nonetheless use them for growth. In
fact,
both
the
Cit–
and
Cit+
lineages
evolved
improved growth on succinate (Turner, 2015). Thus,
the interactions in this flask ecosystem became
increasingly complex as a consequence of evolution,
with competition for not one, not two, but several
potential sources of carbon and energy.
Genome dynamics
How many mutations have occurred in the LTEE?
How have they accumulated over time? In answering
these questions, it is critically important to distin-
guish between the number of mutational events that
have
occurred
and
the
number
of
mutational
differences between an evolved genome and its
ancestor. What follows is a rough approximation
for the former in a nonhypermutable population
through 50 000 generations. The generations took
7500 days of 100-fold dilution and regrowth; each
regrowth produced ~ 3 × 108 cells; each cell’s genome
has ~ 5 × 106 bp; and the point mutation rate is ~ 10–10
per bp per cell replication. The resulting product is
over one billion for point mutations alone, and even
more with insertions, deletions and other types of
mutations. However, the vast majority of mutations
are lost by random genetic drift during the daily
dilutions; many others are eliminated by natural
selection because they have deleterious effects; even
most beneficial mutations are lost by drift or out-
competed by other genotypes with more beneficial
mutations (that is, clonal interference).
And how many mutations have accumulated in
the
evolving
genomes?
Tenaillon
et
al.
(2016)
sequenced 264 clonal genomes from the LTEE
(2 clones from 11 time points and 12 populations)
and compared them with the ancestral genome to
identify the mutations. In total, they found over
17 000 mutations, although most were in the six
populations that evolved hypermutability. Clones
sampled at generation 50 000 from populations that
were not hypermutable averaged ~ 75 mutations in
their genomes, in contrast to the billion-plus muta-
tion events that occurred in each population. Those
75 or so mutations also pale in comparison with the
differences between E. coli and Salmonella (Ochman
et al., 1999), or between two E. coli isolates from
nature (Dixit et al., 2015). However, it is not
surprising because the time scale of the LTEE, while
long for an experiment, is a drop in the bucket of
evolutionary time.
Figure 4
Growth curves of two Cit– clones, each with and without a plasmid carrying the evolved citrate-utilization module, on the
medium used in the LTEE. OD, optical density, shown on a natural-logarithmic scale. (a) The ancestral strain of the LTEE. (b) A 32 000-
generation clone closely related to the Cit+ lineage that evolved in population Ara–3. The red and dark blue curves show average growth
trajectories for the parent clone and its plasmid-bearing transformant, respectively; the light blue curves show replicates for the
transformant. The ancestral strain’s transformant experiences a long and variable delay between depletion of glucose and growth on
citrate, whereas the evolved transformant with the same plasmid switches over quickly and efficiently. Modified from Blount et al. (2012).
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2186
The ISME Journal


--- Page 7 ---
Not all the mutations that accumulated in the
LTEE genomes are beneficial—some might be neu-
tral or even slightly deleterious mutations that
‘hitchhiked’ with beneficial mutations, and others
new mutations that have hardly been tested by
selection.
However,
two
lines
of
evidence
led
Tenaillon et al. (2016) to conclude that the majority
of the point mutations in the evolved clones from
nonhypermutable lineages were, in fact, beneficial.
First, the trajectory of accumulated mutations over
time was better fit by a model with two parameters: a
linear term describing the expected accumulation of
neutral
mutations;
and
a
curvilinear
term
that
describes the declining rate at which beneficial
mutations arise and fix, as reflected in the declining
rate of fitness improvement. Although the fraction of
observed mutations that are beneficial falls as the
second
term
becomes
smaller
over
time,
most
mutations in the evolved genomes are beneficial
based on this analysis. The second line of evidence
compared the accumulation of nonsynonymous and
synonymous
mutations.
After
adjusting
for
the
number of sites at risk for each type, Tenaillon
et al. found an excess of nonsynonymous to synon-
ymous mutations in the evolved genomes of ~ 17-
fold over the first 500 generations of the LTEE and
~ 3.4-fold over 50 000 generations (Figure 5). The
same approach revealed an excess of point mutations
in intergenic regions of the evolved genomes.
Genetic targets of selection
The tandem duplication involving the citT gene was
clearly important in one population. More generally,
although, what genes have changed to improve
fitness by ~ 70%, on average, after 50 000 genera-
tions? The approaches used to find the genetic
targets of selection in the LTEE have changed over
the years, with observable phenotypic alterations
(Cooper et al., 2001, 2003) and changes in DNA
‘fingerprints’ (Papadopoulos et al., 1999; Schneider
et al., 2000; Woods et al., 2006) providing some ways
to track down and study mutations in years past.
Today, as reported above, whole-genome sequencing
allows one to find all of the mutations in a clone
(Velicer et al., 2006; Barrick et al., 2009; Deatherage
and Barrick, 2014), and whole-population metage-
nomic sequencing finds polymorphisms as well
(Barrick and Lenski, 2009; Lang et al., 2013). But
not all of the mutations thus found are beneficial;
some are mere hitchhikers. How can one separate the
wheat from the chaff to infer the genetic targets of
selection? One approach that has proven powerful in
the LTEE (Cooper et al., 2003; Woods et al., 2006), as
well as in other studies both experimental (Wichman
et al., 1999; Burke et al., 2010) and comparative
(Losos et al., 1998; Lieberman et al., 2011), is to look
for parallel evolution, that is, similar changes that
arose
repeatedly
in
independently
evolving
populations.
The hypermutability that evolved in some LTEE
lineages complicates the analysis of parallel evolu-
tion by increasing the numbers of other mutations
relative to the beneficial ones. Therefore, Tenaillon
et al. (2016) focused on samples from populations
that retained the ancestral mutation rate throughout
and others before they became hypermutable. They
found a strong signal of parallel evolution, with 57
genes that comprise only ~ 2% of the protein-coding
portion of the genome having half of the nonsynon-
ymous mutations in the evolved clones. Among the
genes that showed the strongest signals of parallel
changes are ones with core metabolic and regulatory
functions including pyruvate kinase, peptidoglycan
synthesis,
DNA
supercoiling
and
the
stringent
response. For several of these genes, isogenic strains
that differ by a single mutation have been con-
structed and tested in competition, and the muta-
tions
were
usually
confirmed
to
be
beneficial
(Cooper et al., 2003; Crozat et al., 2005; Pelosi
et al., 2006; Barrick et al., 2009). In most cases,
however, the reason that a mutation is beneficial is
not known. A plausible (but unproven) hypothesis is
that many of these mutations fine-tune the regulation
and expression of multiple functions to better match
cellular requirements in the simple, predictable
environment of the LTEE.
In addition to the parallel nonsynonymous sub-
stitutions, Tenaillon et al. (2016) also found numer-
ous parallel deletions of genes and blocks of linked
genes.
Many
of
these
genes
were
horizontally
acquired before the start of the LTEE (that is, present
in
the
ancestral
strain),
including
remnants
of
prophages and toxin–antitoxin modules typically
introduced by plasmids; some other deleted genes
Figure 5
Accumulation of nonsynonymous mutations relative to
the neutral expectation based on synonymous mutations, after
adjusting for the numbers of genomic sites at risk for the two
classes. Each point shows the average of two clones from one
population that retained the ancestral mutation rate throughout or
had not yet evolved hypermutability. The black line shows the
mean trajectory. Modified from Tenaillon et al. (2016).
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2187
The ISME Journal


--- Page 8 ---
encode host-specific functions including the produc-
tion of extracellular capsules and fimbriae. The
average
genome
size
declined
by
~ 1.4%
over
50 000
generations.
These
deletions
presumably
eliminate unused but costly functions. However,
many deletions were generated by recombination
between repeated sequences, especially IS elements,
which might indicate high-frequency events rather
than (or in addition to) selection favouring the
mutants (Cooper et al., 2001).
Where do we go from here?
The future of the LTEE
My hope is that the LTEE will continue for many
generations of scientists (Fox and Lenski, 2015). The
LTEE is simple and fairly inexpensive to run. More
importantly, there are good reasons to keep it going.
First, by its very nature evolution takes time, and
some changes—the origin of new functions and even
species, for example—typically require a lot of time.
So the longer the LTEE runs, the more we can learn.
In a related vein, evolving systems are clever, so
there are potential surprises—changes that might
seem unlikely at the outset or that would not even
have been imagined. The evolution of citrate use is
probably the biggest change observed in the LTEE to
date, but one can imagine bigger changes. Could a
cross-feeding interaction, where one ecotype con-
sumes a by-product released by another, evolve into
a predator–prey interaction, where one party kills
the other to get more of the product? Or might sex
evolve,
either
by
reactivating
a
non-functional
prophage or acquiring the ability to take up DNA
from lysed cells? Second, new technologies may
enable one to look at evolutionary changes in novel
ways. Just as it became possible to sequence entire
genomes, perhaps one day it will be possible to
image, analyze, and understand the entire metabo-
lism of a cell through time. Third, many talented
people have worked on the LTEE, and they bring
new ideas and approaches. I am confident that future
generations of scientists will be equally talented and
innovative.
Other evolution experiments of interest to microbial
ecologists
Of course, the LTEE is just one experiment, and there
have been many other fascinating evolution experi-
ments with microbes. I cannot do justice to all the
questions addressed and the diversity of systems
used in these experiments. However, let me briefly
highlight several dozen articles that I think many
microbial ecologists will find interesting. They cover
so many different topics that I will simply list them
in chronological order.
 Chao et al. (1977) showed that coevolution of
bacteriophage T7 and its E. coli prey led to rapid
diversification and an increasingly complex com-
munity structure.
 Paquin and Adams (1983) saw that non-transitive
competitive interactions in evolving populations
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae caused declines in
fitness relative to the initial strain, although
genotypes that rose to dominance were more fit
than their immediate progenitors.
 Bull et al. (1991) showed that a filamentous phage
evolved reduced virulence when its transmission
was strictly vertical, but the vertically adapted
lines
were
outcompeted
during
horizontal
transmission.
 Zambrano et al. (1993) found that evolution during
prolonged starvation favored E. coli mutants that
can grow when other cells are in stationary phase
or even dying.
 Rosenzweig et al. (1994) observed the evolution of
stable polymorphisms mediated by cross-feeding
interactions in chemostat cultures of E. coli.
 Schrag
et
al.
(1997)
showed
that
antibiotic-
resistant E. coli, when propagated without anti-
biotic, may evolve compensatory mutations that
eliminate the cost of resistance and even preclude
reversion to sensitivity.
 Rainey and Travisano (1998) demonstrated that
spatially structured environments and the result-
ing physicochemical gradients promoted diversi-
fication of Pseudomonas fluorescens into multiple
ecotypes that exploited distinct niches.
 Burch and Chao (1999) found that populations of
an RNA phage followed different evolutionary
paths depending on their population size during
periodic bottlenecks.
 Wichman et al. (2000) evolved phages ϕX174 and
S13 on both E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium
hosts and saw that many of the resulting substitu-
tions affected the same codons that distinguish
these closely related phages, indicating conver-
gence between natural and laboratory-evolved
lineages.
 Dionisio et al. (2005) evolved a multidrug-resistant
plasmid that enhanced the fitness of its E. coli
hosts even in the absence of antibiotics.
 Dennehy et al. (2006) examined how source-sink
dynamics affected the potential for a virus to adapt
to a new host type.
 Fiegna et al. (2006) started with a mutant of
Myxococcus xanthus that was an obligate cheater
—able to form fruiting bodies and spores only by
exploiting other strains—and evolved a strain that
not only makes fruiting bodies and spores but also
resists cheating.
 Gerstein et al. (2006) evolved haploid, diploid and
tetraploid strains of S. cerevisiae and found they
converged on diploidy.
 Kerr et al. (2006) showed that restricted migration
of phage T4 promoted the evolution of more
prudent
use
of
their
bacterial
prey,
whereas
unrestricted
migration
favored
more
rapacious phage.
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2188
The ISME Journal


--- Page 9 ---
 Moore
and
Woods (2006)
compared rates of
adaptation to a laboratory environment among
several
strains
of
E.
coli
isolated
from
natural hosts.
 Cooper (2007) showed that horizontal gene trans-
fer accelerated adaptive evolution by reducing
clonal interference between beneficial mutations
in E. coli populations.
 Meyer and Kassen (2007) found that predation by
the protist Tetrahymena thermophila eventually
increased the diversity of its bacterial prey, but it
also delayed diversification by lowering the prey
population
size
and
hence
the
supply
of
mutations.
 Tagkopoulos et al. (2008) evolved E. coli in a
regime where an increase in temperature preceded
a shift from anaerobic to aerobic growth, rather
than the opposite shift that occurs when cells
colonize the gut, thereby reversing the coupling in
gene expression.
 Hillesland and Stahl (2010) saw the evolution
of
increased
stability
and
productivity
in
a
constructed
mutualism
between
the
sulfate-
reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio vulgaris and
the
methanogenic
archaeon
Methanococcus
maripaludis.
 Paterson et al. (2010) showed that genome evolu-
tion in phage ϕ2 was faster when its P. fluorescens
prey were allowed to coevolve than when the prey
population was kept constant by restarting it from
frozen samples.
 Sota et al. (2010) propagated antibiotic resistance
plasmids in several host species and found that the
plasmids evolved to be more stably inherited.
 Kuzdzal-Fick et al. (2011) cultured Dictyostelium
discoideum under different regimes and showed
that cheaters that exploit other strains evolved
under conditions of low, but not high, genetic
relatedness.
 Poltak and Cooper (2011) evolved Burkholderia
cenocepacia biofilms and observed the emergence
of heterogeneous mixtures that were more produc-
tive than any individual member.
 Bell (2012) propagated hundreds of populations of
the green alga Chlamydomonas in the dark and
found most went extinct, but a history of sexual
reproduction increased the proportion of surviving
lineages.
 Ensminger et al. (2012) maintained Legionella
pneumophila in mouse macrophages and showed
that some mutations beneficial in that environ-
ment
were
detrimental
in
their
usual
protozoan hosts.
 Meyer et al. (2012) found that coevolution of
phage λ and E. coli often favored phage genotypes
that could infect cells through a novel receptor,
one not previously detected in traditional genetic
work on this interaction.
 Ratcliff et al. (2012) used a simple size-based
selection scheme to evolve S. cerevisiae that
undergo a multicellular life cycle.
 Soto
et al.
(2012) studied adaptation
of
the
bioluminescent Vibrio fischeri to alternative spe-
cies of squid hosts.
 Tenaillon et al. (2012) evolved 4100 replicate
E. coli lines at high temperature and, based on
whole-genome sequencing, found two distinct
adaptive pathways.
 Toprak et al. (2012) evolved E. coli populations
that grow at increasing concentrations of antibio-
tics using a ‘morbidostat’ that maintains a constant
level of inhibition.
 Bachmann et al. (2013) used a water-in-oil emul-
sion to produce a population structure that favored
higher yield, as opposed to faster growth, in
Lactococcus lactis.
 Lang et al. (2013) performed metagenomic sequen-
cing on 40 evolving populations of S. cerevisiae to
characterize the forces responsible for the rise and
fall of polymorphisms.
 Lindsey et al. (2013) showed that rapidly rising
antibiotic concentrations drove E. coli populations
extinct by precluding certain evolutionary paths
that would be accessible if the changes were
slower.
 Traverse et al. (2013) evolved B. cenocepacia
under a regime that favored both biofilm formation
and dispersal, finding mutations similar to those in
isolates of pathogens that colonize the lungs of
individuals with cystic fibrosis.
 Van Ditmarsch et al. (2013) saw the evolution of
multi-flagellated, hyper-swarming P. aeruginosa,
with a concomitant reduction in their ability to
form biofilms.
 Hutchins et al. (2015) showed that the marine
cyanobacterium Trichodesmium, which increases
its nitrogen fixation as a plastic response to high
CO2, evolved a constitutively elevated rate after
several years of exposure to that condition.
 Levy et al. (2015) used random barcodes to track
lineages in S. cerevisiae populations, revealing
thousands of beneficial mutations that transiently
increased in abundance but were eventually out-
competed by other more beneficial mutations.
 Scheinin et al. (2015) performed an evolution
experiment using mesocosms in a marine environ-
ment with both ambient and elevated CO2 levels,
and they saw adaptation of the diatom Skeleto-
nema marinoi to the elevated concentration.
 Baym
et
al.
(2016)
constructed
devices—in
essence, giant Petri dishes—on which they could
directly visualize the evolution of motile E. coli
able to migrate into and grow at increasing
antibiotic concentrations.
 Meyer et al. (2016) studied the divergence and
incipient speciation of a phage λ strain that could
infect E. coli through either of two receptors into
specialists able to use only one or the other.
 Schlüter et al. (2016) demonstrated a complicated
interplay between the physiological and evolu-
tionary responses of the calcifying phytoplankton
Emiliania huxleyi to ocean acidification.
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2189
The ISME Journal


--- Page 10 ---
 Kacar et al. (2017) mixed paleobiology, synthetic
biology and experimental evolution by making an
ancient version of a core gene, moving it into the
chromosome of a modern E. coli strain, and
observing how the bacteria subsequently evolved.
Also, several review articles and books discuss
these and other evolution experiments that have
been performed using microorganisms as well as
animals and plants (Bell, 1997; Elena and Lenski,
2003; Buckling et al., 2009; Garland and Rose, 2009;
Kawecki et al., 2012; Barrick and Lenski, 2013;
Brockhurst and Koskella, 2013; Kassen, 2014; Hoang
et al., 2016).
Opportunities to integrate experimental evolution and
microbial ecology
Even with this extraordinary range of topics, there
are undoubtedly more opportunities to use experi-
mental evolution to address issues of interest to
microbial ecologists, evolutionary biologists and
geneticists. Also, most experiments lasted only a
few hundred generations. I think much more could
be learned by substantially extending such experi-
ments. Evolution is an open-ended process that often
involves complex ecological feedbacks and genetic
interactions. Given time, these feedbacks and inter-
actions may yield new discoveries and interesting
surprises, as has happened throughout the LTEE.
I do not mean to minimize the difficulty or costs, but
I suggest that LTEEs might sometimes run in the
background as teams pursue other short-term pro-
jects. With the ability to freeze samples and the
declining costs of many high-throughput analyses,
such
long-term
experiments
could
prove
cost-
effective in terms of their scientific value.
In closing, let me propose a strategy that might
build an interesting and productive new bridge
between experimental evolution and microbial ecol-
ogy. To date, most evolution experiments have
examined either single species evolving in isolation,
like the LTEE, or pairs of interacting species, such as
bacteria and phage. In principle, we would like to
watch an entire microbial community of thousands
of species evolve over time, with the potential to
replicate communities, freeze all of the constituent
members, manipulate genomes and environments in
order to distinguish adaptation from random drift,
and more. But it is hard to know where to begin in
designing, much less analyzing, such a daunting
experiment. The following strategy, by contrast,
extends experimental evolution to whole commu-
nities, but in a way that limits the conceptual and
practical difficulties. We might call this generic
approach an ‘embedded species evolving in a natural
community experiment’—or ESENCE for short.
An ESENCE would begin by identifying one
member of a natural community that is the primary
focus of the experiment. That species would be
chosen, at least in part, based on its experimental
tractability
including
the availability
of
genetic
markers that allow it to be tracked and enumerated
(without handicapping its performance in the com-
munity) as well as the potential to manipulate its
genome to evaluate the effects of mutations that arise
during the ESENCE. Rather than trying to understand
the entire community and its evolution from the
outset, one could (1) isolate a representative of
the focal species from the community, (2) mark the
isolate genetically so that it can be monitored,
(3) introduce the marked isolate and its unmarked
progenitor into replicate microcosms subject to the
same or different treatments of interest, (4) monitor
the relative abundance of the marked and unmarked
variants of the focal species, (5) use a shift in their
relative abundance as an indication that the variant
that is increasing in relative abundance has acquired
a beneficial mutation (De Visser and Rozen, 2006;
Hegreness et al., 2006; Kao and Sherlock, 2008;
Woods et al., 2011), (6) sample both variants and
sequence their genomes, ideally finding they are
identical except for one or a few mutations—or gene
transfer events (Shapiro et al., 2012; Bendall et al.,
2016)—of interest. If multiple changes occurred, one
could (7) make isogenic strains to separate the
mutations,
using
parallelism
across
replicates
(Wichman et al., 1999; Lieberman et al., 2011;
Tenaillon et al., 2016) or other information to
identify changes of particular interest. One could
then (8) compete the constructed strains to test
whether a mutation of interest is beneficial in the
context of the community and treatment imposed
and, (9) at the same time, monitor the effects of the
changing abundances of the manipulated competi-
tors on other community members, thereby begin-
ning
to
probe
and
identify
eco-evolutionary
feedbacks between the focal species and the com-
munity (Widder et al., 2016). If two or more
treatments (for example, different environments)
are used, then one could also (10) test an evolved
mutation in the other treatments as well as the one in
which it arose to evaluate whether its benefit, if any,
was specific to the relevant treatment.
Performing an ESENCE will certainly be difficult,
but the experiment by Scheinin et al. (2015) on
adaptation of an ocean-dwelling diatom to increased
CO2 level shows the potential for this approach. One
difference between that study and the ESENCE
strategy is that evolution depended on standing
genetic variation present at the start of the experi-
ment,
rather
than
on
de
novo
variants.
That
difference was unavoidable given the study system,
but it does complicate genetic analysis. Gómez and
Buckling (2011, 2013) performed an experiment in
which they compared the coevolution and diversifi-
cation
of
P.
fluorescens
and
phage
SBW25ϕ2
between soil microcosms with and without the
resident microbial community, anticipating many
aspects of the ESENCE strategy outlined above.
These experiments—along with beautiful studies
on evolution in action in natural systems with
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2190
The ISME Journal


--- Page 11 ---
limited
diversity,
including
acid-mine
drainage
communities (Denef et al., 2010) and the lungs of
people with cystic fibrosis (Lieberman et al., 2011)—
should inspire and stimulate future directions in the
field of microbial experimental evolution.
Conflict of Interest
The author declares no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to everyone who has participated in the LTEE over
the years including especially the unsung heroes—the
technicians and lab managers Sue Simpson, Lynette
Ekunwe and especially Neerja Hajela. Thanks also to Mike
Wiser, Rohan Maddamsetti, Jeff Barrick, Zach Blount and
Olivier
Tenaillon
for
preparing
figures,
and
to
two
reviewers for their helpful comments. The LTEE has been
supported by grants from the National Science Foundation
(currently
DEB-1451740
and
cooperative
agreement
DBI-0939454) and by the John Hannah Endowment at
Michigan State University.
References
Antonovics J. (1976). The input from population genetics:
the new ecological genetics. Syst Bot 1: 233–245.
Bachmann H, Fischlechner M, Rabbers I, Barfa N, Branco
dos Santos F, Molenaar D et al. (2013). Availability of
public
goods
shapes
the
evolution
of
competing
metabolic strategies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:
14302–14307.
Barrick JE, Lenski RE. (2009). Genome-wide mutational
diversity in an evolving population of Escherichia coli.
Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 74: 119–129.
Barrick JE, Lenski RE. (2013). Genome dynamics during
experimental evolution. Nat Rev Gen 14: 827–839.
Barrick JE, Yu DS, Yoon SH, Jeong H, Oh TK, Schneider D
et al. (2009). Genome evolution and adaptation in a
long-term experiment with Escherichia coli. Nature
461: 1243–1247.
Baym M, Lieberman TD, Kelsic ED, Chait R, Gross R,
Yelin I et al. (2016). Spatiotemporal microbial evolu-
tion on antibiotic landscapes. Science 353: 1147–1151.
Bell G. (1997). Selection: The Mechanism of Evolution.
Chapman & Hall: New York.
Bell G. (2012). Evolutionary rescue of a green alga kept in
the dark. Biol Lett 9: 20120823.
Bendall
ML,
Stevens
SLR,
Chan
L-K,
Malfatti
S,
Schwientek P, Tremblay J et al. (2016). Genome-wide
selective sweeps and gene-specific sweeps in natural
bacterial populations. ISME J 10: 1589–1601.
Blount ZD, Borland CZ, Lenski RE. (2008). Historical
contingency and the evolution of a key innovation in
an experimental population of Escherichia coli. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 105: 7899–7906.
Blount ZD, Barrick JE, Davidson CJ, Lenski RE. (2012).
Genomic
analysis
of
a
key
innovation
in
an
experimental
Escherichia
coli
population.
Nature
489: 513–518.
Brockhurst MA, Koskella B. (2013). Experimental coevolu-
tion of species interactions. Trends Ecol Evol 28:
367–375.
Buckling A, Maclean RC, Brockhurst MA, Colegrave N.
(2009).
The
Beagle
in
a
bottle.
Nature
457:
824–829.
Bull JJ, Molineux IJ, Rice
WR. (1991). Selection
of
benevolence in a host-parasite system. Evolution 45:
875–882.
Burke MK, Dunham JP, Shahrestani P, Thornton KR,
Rose MR, Long AD. (2010). Genome-wide analysis of
a long-term evolution experiment with Drosophila.
Nature 467: 587–590.
Burch CL, Chao L. (1999). Evolution by small steps and
rugged landscapes in the RNA virus ϕ6. Genetics 151:
921–927.
Chao L, Levin BR, Stewart FM. (1977). A complex
community in a simple habitat: an experimental study
with bacteria and phage. Ecology 58: 369–378.
Cooper TF. (2007). Recombination speeds adaptation by
reducing competition between beneficial mutations
in populations of Escherichia coli. PLoS Biol 5:
1899–1905.
Cooper TF, Rozen DE, Lenski RE. (2003). Parallel changes
in
gene
expression
after
20,000
generations
of
evolution in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 100: 1072–1077.
Cooper VS, Schneider D, Blot M, Lenski RE. (2001).
Mechanisms causing rapid and parallel losses of ribose
catabolism in evolving populations of E. coli B.
J Bacteriol 183: 2834–2841.
Crozat
E,
Philippe
N,
Lenski
RE,
Geiselmann
J,
Schneider D. (2005). Long-term experimental evolu-
tion in Escherichia coli. XII. DNA topology as a key
target of selection. Genetics 169: 523–532.
Deatherage DE, Barrick JE. (2014). Identification of muta-
tions
in
laboratory-evolved
microbes
from
next-
generation sequencing data using breseq. Methods
Mol Biol 1151: 165–188.
Denef VJ, Mueller RS, Banfield JF. (2010). AMD biofilms:
using model communities to study microbial evolution
and
ecological
complexity
in
nature.
ISME
J
4: 599–610.
Dennehy JJ, Friedenberg NA, Holt RD, Turner PE. (2006).
Viral ecology and the maintenance of novel host use.
Am Nat 167: 429–439.
de Visser JAGM, Lenski RE. (2002). Long-term experi-
mental evolution in Escherichia coli. XI. Rejection of
non-transitive interactions as cause of declining rate of
adaptation. BMC Evol Biol 2: 169.
de Visser JAGM, Rozen DE. (2006). Clonal interference and
the periodic selection of new beneficial mutations in
Escherichia coli. Genetics 172: 2093–2100.
Dionisio F, Conceicao IC, Marques ACR, Fernandes L,
Gordo I. (2005). The evolution of a conjugative plasmid
and its ability to increase bacterial fitness. Biol Lett
1: 250–252.
Dixit
PD,
Pang
TY,
Studier
FW,
Maslov
S.
(2015).
Recombinant
transfer
in
the
basic
genome
of Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:
9070–9075.
Elena SF, Lenski RE. (2003). Evolution experiments with
microorganisms: the dynamics and genetic bases of
adaptation. Nat Rev Gen 4: 457–469.
Ensminger AW, Yassin Y, Miron A, Isberg RR. (2012).
Experimental evolution of Legionella pneumophila in
mouse macrophages leads to strains with altered
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2191
The ISME Journal


--- Page 12 ---
determinants of environmental survival. PLoS Path 8:
e1002731.
Fiegna
F,
Yu
YTN,
Kadam
SV,
Velicer
GJ.
(2006).
Evolution of an obligate social cheater to a superior
cooperator. Nature 441: 310–314.
Fox JW, Lenski RE. (2015). From here to eternity–the
theory and practice of a really long experiment. PLoS
Biol 13: e1002185.
Garland
Jr
T ,
Rose
MR,
eds.
(2009).
Experimental
Evolution: Concepts, Methods, and Applications of
Selection Experiments. University of California Press:
Berkeley, CA, USA.
Gerrish PJ, Lenski RE. (1998). The fate of competing
beneficial
mutations
in
an
asexual
population.
Genetica 102/103: 127–144.
Gerstein AC, Chun H-JE, Grant A, Otto SP. (2006). Genomic
convergence
toward
diploidy
in
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. PLoS Genet 2: e145.
Gómez P, Buckling A. (2011). Bacteria-phage antagonistic
coevolution in soil. Science 332: 106–109.
Gómez P, Buckling A. (2013). Real-time microbial adaptive
diversification in soil. Ecol Lett 16: 650–655.
Good BH, Desai MM. (2016). Evolution of mutation rates in
rapidly adapting asexual populations. Genetics 204:
1249–1266.
Grant PR, Grant BR. (2014). 40 Years of Evolution:
Darwin’s Finches on Daphne Major Island. Princeton
University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA.
Großkopf T, Consuegra J, Gaffé J, Willison J, Lenski RE,
Soyer OS et al. (2016). Metabolic modelling in a
dynamic evolutionary framework predicts adaptive
diversification of bacteria in a long-term evolution
experiment. BMC Evol Biol 16: 163.
Hegreness M, Shoresh N, Hartl D, Kishony R. (2006). An
equivalence principle for the incorporation of favor-
able mutations in asexual populations. Science 311:
1615–1617.
Hillesland KL, Stahl DA. (2010). Rapid evolution of
stability and productivity at the origin of a microbial
mutualism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107: 2124–2129.
Hoang KL, Morran LT, Gerardo NM. (2016). Experimental
evolution as an underutilized tool for studying bene-
ficial animal–microbe interactions. Front Microbiol
7: 1444.
Hutchins
DA,
Walworth
NG,
Webb
EA,
Saito
MA,
Moran D, McIlvin MR et al. (2015). Irreversibly
increased nitrogen fixation in Trichodesmium experi-
mentally adapted to elevated carbon dioxide. Nat
Comm 6: 8155.
Kacar B, Tran LI, Ge X, Sanyal S, Gaucher EA. (2017).
Experimental evolution of Escherichia coli harboring
an ancient translation protein. J Mol Evol 84: 69–84.
Kao KC, Sherlock G. (2008). Molecular characterization of
clonal interference during adaptive evolution in asex-
ual populations of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nat Gen
40: 1499–1504.
Kassen R. (2014). Experimental Evolution and the Nature
of Biodiversity. Roberts: Denver, CO, USA.
Kawecki TJ, Lenski RE, Ebert D, Hollis B, Olivieri I,
Whitlock MC. (2012). Experimental evolution. Trends
Ecol Evol 27: 547–560.
Kerr B, Neuhauser C, Bohannan BJM, Dean AM. (2006).
Local migration promotes competitive restraint in a
host–pathogen 'tragedy of the commons'. Nature 442:
75–78.
Khan AI, Dinh DM, Schneider D, Lenski RE, Cooper TF.
(2011).
Negative
epistasis
between
beneficial
mutations in an evolving bacterial population. Science
332: 1193–1196.
Kryazhimskiy S, Rice DP, Jerison ER, Desai MM. (2014).
Global
epistasis
makes
adaptation
predictable
despite
sequence-level
stochasticity.
Science
344:
1519–1522.
Kuzdzal-Fick JJ, Fox SA, Strassmann JE, Queller DC.
(2011). High relatedness is necessary and sufficient to
maintain multicellularity in Dictyostelium. Science
334: 1548–1551.
Lang
GI,
Rice
DP,
Hickman
MJ,
Sodergren
E,
Weinstock GM, Botstein D et al. (2013). Pervasive
genetic hitchhiking and clonal interference in forty
evolving yeast populations. Nature 500: 571–574.
Le Gac M, Plucain J, Hindré T, Lenski RE, Schneider D.
(2012).
Ecological
and
evolutionary
dynamics
of
coexisting lineages during a long-term experiment
with Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:
9487–9492.
Lenski RE, Travisano M. (1994). Dynamics of adaptation
and diversification: a 10,000-generation experiment
with bacterial populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:
6808–6814.
Lenski RE, Rose MR, Simpson SC, Tadler SC. (1991). Long-
term experimental evolution in Escherichia coli. I.
Adaptation and divergence during 2,000 generations.
Am Nat 138: 1315–1341.
Levy SF, Blundell JR, Venkataram S, Petrov DA, Fisher DS,
Sherlock
G.
(2015).
Quantitative
evolutionary
dynamics using high-resolution lineage tracking. Nat-
ure 519: 181–186.
Lieberman TD, Michel J-B, Aingaran M, Potter-Bynoe G,
Roux D, Davis MR et al. (2011). Parallel bacterial
evolution within multiple patients identifies candidate
pathogenicity genes. Nat Gen 43: 1275–1280.
Lindsey HA, Gallie J, Taylor S, Kerr B. (2013). Evolutionary
rescue from extinction is contingent on a lower rate of
environmental change. Nature 494: 463–467.
Losos JB, Jackman TR, Larson A, de Queiroz K, Rodríguez-
Schettino L. (1998). Contingency and determinism in
replicated
adaptive
radiations
of
island
lizards.
Science 279: 2115–2118.
Maddamsetti R, Lenski RE, Barrick JE. (2015). Adaptation,
clonal interference, and frequency-dependent interac-
tions
in
a
long-term
evolution
experiment
with
Escherichia coli. Genetics 200: 619–631.
Meyer JR, Kassen R. (2007). The effects of competition and
predation on diversification in a model adaptive
radiation. Nature 446: 432–435.
Meyer JR, Dobias DT, Weitz JS, Barrick JE, Quick RT,
Lenski RE. (2012). Repeatability and contingency in
the evolution of a key innovation in phage Lambda.
Science 335: 428–432.
Meyer JR, Dobias DT, Medina SJ, Servilio L, Gupta A,
Lenski RE. (2016). Ecological speciation of bacterioph-
age Lambda in allopatry and sympatry. Science 354:
1301–1304.
Moore FBG, Woods R. (2006). Tempo and constraint
of
adaptive
evolution
in
Escherichia
coli
(Enterobacteriaceae, Enterobacteriales). Biol J Linn
Soc 88: 403–411.
Moore FBG, Rozen DE, Lenski RE. (2000). Pervasive
compensatory adaptation in Escherichia coli. Proc R
Soc Lond B 267: 515–522.
Ochman H, Elwyn S, Moran NA. (1999). Calibrating
bacterial evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:
12638–12643.
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2192
The ISME Journal


--- Page 13 ---
Paquin CE, Adams J. (1983). Relative fitness can decrease
in evolving asexual populations of S. cerevisiae.
Nature 306: 368–371.
Papadopoulos D, Schneider D, Meier-Eiss J, Arber W,
Lenski RE, Blot M. (1999). Genomic evolution during a
10 000-generation experiment with bacteria. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 96: 3807–3812.
Paterson S, Vogwill T, Buckling A, Benmayor R, Spiers AJ,
Thomson NR et al. (2010). Antagonistic coevolution
accelerates molecular evolution. Nature 464: 275–278.
Pelosi L, Kühn L, Guetta D, Garin J, Geiselmann J,
Lenski RE et al. (2006). Parallel changes in global
protein profiles during long-term experimental evolu-
tion in Escherichia coli. Genetics 173: 1851–1869.
Poltak SR, Cooper VS. (2011). Ecological succession in
long-term experimentally evolved biofilms produces
synergistic communities. ISME J 5: 369–378.
Quandt EM, Deatherage DE, Ellington AD, Georgiou G,
Barrick JE. (2014). Recursive genomewide recombina-
tion and sequencing reveals a key refinement step in
the evolution of a metabolic innovation in Escherichia
coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111: 2217–2222.
Quandt
EM,
Gollihar
J,
Blount
ZD,
Ellington
AD,
Georgiou G, Barrick JE. (2015). Fine-tuning citrate
synthase flux potentiates and refines metabolic inno-
vation in the Lenski evolution experiment. eLife 4:
e09696.
Raeside C, Gaffé J, Deatherage DE, Tenaillon O, Briska A,
Ptashkin RN et al. (2014). Large chromosomal rearran-
gements during a long-term evolution experiment with
Escherichia coli. mBio 5: e01377–14.
Rainey PB, Travisano M. (1998). Adaptive radiation in a
heterogeneous environment. Nature 394: 69–72.
Ratcliff WC, Denison RF, Borrello M, Travisano M. (2012).
Experimental evolution of multicellularity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 109: 1595–1600.
Rosenzweig RF, Sharp RR, Treves DS, Adams J. (1994).
Microbial evolution in a simple unstructured environ-
ment:
genetic
differentiation
in
Escherichia
coli.
Genetics 137: 903–917.
Rozen DE, Lenski RE. (2000). Long-term experimental
evolution in Escherichia coli. VIII. Dynamics of a
balanced polymorphism. Am Nat 155: 24–35.
Scheinin M, Riebesell U, Rynearson TA, Lohbeck KT,
Collins S. (2015). Experimental evolution gone wild.
J Roy Soc Interface 12: 20150056.
Schlüter
L,
Lohbeck
KT,
Gröger
JP,
Riebesell
U,
Reusch TBH. (2016). Long-term dynamics of adaptive
evolution
in
a
globally
important
phytoplankton
species to ocean acidification. Sci Adv 2: e1501660.
Schneider D, Duperchy E, Coursange E, Lenski RE, Blot M.
(2000). Long-term experimental evolution in Escher-
ichia coli. IX. Characterization of IS-mediated muta-
tions and rearrangements. Genetics 156: 477–488.
Schrag SJ, Perrot V, Levin BR. (1997). Adaptation to the
fitness costs of antibiotic resistance in Escherichia coli.
Proc R Soc Lond B 264: 1287–1291.
Shapiro
BJ,
Friedman
J,
Cordero
OX,
Preheim
SP,
Timberlake SC, Szabo G et al. (2012). Population
genomics of early events in the ecological differentia-
tion of bacteria. Science 336: 48–51.
Sniegowski PD, Gerrish PJ, Lenski RE. (1997). Evolution of
high mutation rates in experimental populations of
Escherichia coli. Nature 387: 703–705.
Sota M, Yano H, Hughes JM, Daughdrill GW, Abdo Z,
Forney LJ et al. (2010). Shifts in the host range
of a promiscuous plasmid through parallel evolution
of
its
replication
initiation
protein.
ISME
J
4:
1568–1580.
Soto W, Punke EB, Nishiguchi MK. (2012). Evolutionary
perspectives in a mutualism of sepiolid squid and
bioluminescent bacteria: combined usage of microbial
experimental
evolution
and
temporal
population
genetics. Evolution 66: 1308–1321.
Tagkopoulos I, Liu Y-C, Tavazoie S. (2008). Predictive
behavior within microbial genetic networks. Science
320: 1313–1317.
Tenaillon O, Taddei F, Radman M, Matic I. (2001). Second-
order selection in bacterial evolution: selection acting
on mutation and recombination rates in the course of
adaptation. Res Microbiol 152: 11–16.
Tenaillon O, Rodríguez-Verdugo A, Gaut RL, McDonald P,
Bennett AF, Long AD et al. (2012). The molecular
diversity of adaptive convergence. Science 335: 457–461.
Tenaillon
O,
Barrick
JE,
Ribeck
N,
Deatherage
DE,
Blanchard JL, Dasgupta A et al. (2016). Tempo and
mode of genome evolution in a 50,000-generation
experiment. Nature 536: 165–170.
Toprak E, Veres A, Michel J-B, Chait R, Hartl DL,
Kishony R. (2012). Evolutionary paths to antibiotic
resistance under dynamically sustained drug selection.
Nat Gen 44: 101–105.
Traverse CC, Mayo-Smith LM, Poltak SR, Cooper VS.
(2013). Tangled bank of experimentally evolved Bur-
kholderia biofilms reflects selection during chronic
infections. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: E250–E259.
Turner CB. (2015). Experimental Evolution and Ecological
Consequences: New Niches and Changing Soichiome-
try PhD. Michigan State University: East Lansing,
Michigan.
Turner CB, Blount ZD, Lenski RE. (2015). Replaying
evolution to test the cause of extinction of one ecotype
in an experimentally evolved population. PLoS One
10: e0142050.
Van
Ditmarsch
D,
Boyle
KE,
Sakhtah
H,
Oyler
JE,
Nadell CD, Déziel E et al. (2013). Convergent evolution
of hyperswarming leads to impaired biofilm formation
in pathogenic bacteria. Cell Rep 4: 697–708.
Vasi
F,
Travisano
M,
Lenski
RE.
(1994).
Long-term
experimental evolution in Escherichia coli. II. Changes
in life-history traits during adaptation to a seasonal
environment. Am Nat 144: 432–456.
Velicer GJ,
Raddatz G,
Keller H, Deiss
S, Lanz
C,
Dinkelacker I et al. (2006). Comprehensive mutation
identification in an evolved bacterial cooperator and
its cheating ancestor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:
8107–8112.
Wichman HA, Badgett MR, Scott LA, Boulianne CM,
Bull JJ. (1999). Different trajectories of parallel evolu-
tion during viral adaptation. Science 285: 422–424.
Wichman HA, Scott LA, Yarber CD, Bull JJ. (2000).
Experimental evolution recapitulates natural evolu-
tion. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond 355: 1677–1684.
Widder S, Allen RJ, Pfeiffer T, Curtis TP, Wiuf C, Sloan WT
et al. (2016). Challenges in microbial ecology: building
predictive understanding of community function and
dynamics. ISME J 10: 2557–2568.
Wielgoss S, Barrick JE, Tenaillon O, Wiser MJ, Dittmar WJ,
Cruveiller S et al. (2013). Mutation rate dynamics in a
bacterial population reflect tension between adaptation
and genetic load. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 222–227.
Wilke CO, Lenski RE, Adami C. (2003). Compensatory
mutations cause excess of antagonistic epistasis in
RNA secondary structure folding. BMC Evol Biol 3: 3.
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2193
The ISME Journal


--- Page 14 ---
Wiser
MJ,
Ribeck
N,
Lenski
RE.
(2013).
Long-term
dynamics
of
adaptation
in
asexual
populations.
Science 342: 1364–1367.
Woods
R,
Schneider
D,
Winkworth
CL,
Riley
MA,
Lenski
RE.
(2006).
Tests
of
parallel
molecular
evolution
in
a
long-term
experiment
with
Escherichia
coli.
Proc
Natl
Acad
Sci
USA
103:
9107–9112.
Woods RJ, Barrick JE, Cooper TF, Shrestha U, Kauth MR,
Lenski RE. (2011). Second-order selection for evolva-
bility in a large Escherichia coli population. Science
331: 1433–1436.
Zambrano
MM,
Siegele
DA,
Almiron
M,
Tormo
A,
Kolter R. (1993). Microbial competition: Escherichia
coli mutants that take over stationary phase cultures.
Science 259: 1757–1760.
Dynamics of adaptation and genome evolution
RE Lenski
2194
The ISME Journal
