--- Page 1 ---
REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure,
functions and diseases
Ludi Yang1,2, Ruobing Jia1,2, Tongxin Ge1,2, Shengfang Ge1,2, Ai Zhuang1,2✉, Peiwei Chai1,2✉and Xianqun Fan
1,2✉
Extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA), ranging in size from tens to millions of base pairs, is independent of conventional
chromosomes. Recently, eccDNAs have been considered an unanticipated major source of somatic rearrangements, contributing to
genomic remodeling through chimeric circularization and reintegration of circular DNA into the linear genome. In addition, the
origin of eccDNA is considered to be associated with essential chromatin-related events, including the formation of super-
enhancers and DNA repair machineries. Moreover, our understanding of the properties and functions of eccDNA has continuously
and greatly expanded. Emerging investigations demonstrate that eccDNAs serve as multifunctional molecules in various organisms
during diversiﬁed biological processes, such as epigenetic remodeling, telomere trimming, and the regulation of canonical
signaling pathways. Importantly, its special distribution potentiates eccDNA as a measurable biomarker in many diseases, especially
cancers. The loss of eccDNA homeostasis facilitates tumor initiation, malignant progression, and heterogeneous evolution in many
cancers. An in-depth understanding of eccDNA provides novel insights for precision cancer treatment. In this review, we
summarized the discovery history of eccDNA, discussed the biogenesis, characteristics, and functions of eccDNA. Moreover, we
emphasized the role of eccDNA during tumor pathogenesis and malignant evolution. Therapeutically, we summarized potential
clinical applications that target aberrant eccDNA in multiple diseases.
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 
; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-022-01176-8
INTRODUCTION
DNA was discovered by Friedrich Miescher in 1869 and chromo-
somes consisting of linear double-stranded DNA are known to be
the major carrier of genetic material in the eukaryotic nucleus.1
Extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA) is a collective name for
the circular, double-stranded molecules in the nuclei, which is
derived from but independent of chromosomal DNA (chrDNA),
with various sizes and sequences.2,3 EccDNA can be as small as
dozens of base pairs (bp) with only noncoding repeats, while
some could contain DNA fragments up to several megabase pairs
and even acquire all the genetic elements required for its
replication and propagation of the genetic material.4,5 The
existence of eccDNA is such a common phenomenon that it has
been
found
in
all
tested
eukaryotes,
including
plants,6–10
nematodes,11 ciliates,12 yeast,13,14 drosophila,15,16 Xenopus,17,18
pigeons,19 and mammalian species.20–22 It is widely distributed in
human normal tissues, cancerous tissues, and body ﬂuid.5,23–25
Despite being discovered for a long time, the signiﬁcance of
eccDNA remained enigmatic. Moreover, several studies have
captured some of the crucial features and functions of eccDNA
(especially those with larger structures and functional genes in
cancer), which have been validated by advanced high-throughput
sequencing technologies. Surprisingly, unlike liner DNA in the
chromosome,
eccDNA
is
featured
with
elevated
chromatin
accessibility (open-chromatin) and ultralong-range chromatin
contact.2,23,26,27 Additionally, frequent ampliﬁcation of tumor-
related genes is observed in the eccDNA.2,28–30 These features
enable eccDNA to drive malignant transformation, promote tumor
evolution, and thereby serve as potential biomarkers for tumor
diagnosis and prognosis. More importantly, the elimination of
extrachromosomally ampliﬁed proto-oncogenes has triggered
efﬁcient therapeutic efﬁcacy, functioning as a potential strategy
in dealing with malignancies.3,4,31,32
In this review, eccDNA was introduced from a historical
perspective. Subsequently, we discussed the biogenesis and
features of eccDNA and summarized the different types of
eccDNA, with a focus on their critical roles during multiple
physiological and pathological conditions, especially in cancers.
We also highlighted up-to-date research methods, tools, and
databases in the exploration of eccDNAs. Finally, we provided
novel insights into the potential applications of eccDNA in dealing
with malignancies.
HISTORY OF ECCDNA
EccDNA was ﬁrst reported more than ﬁve decades ago. Franklin
Stahl conjectured the potential existence of circular DNA in higher
organisms, which was later conﬁrmed by Yasuo Hotta and Alix
Bassel in 1964. They found circular DNA in mammalian cells, boar
sperms, and wheat embryos.33 Before long, extrachromosomal
DNA elements of diverse sizes and numbers were observed in
mitotic human tumor cells. They were referred to as double
minutes (DMs) at that time, as they usually appear in pairs.34,35
Since
then,
researchers
have
focused
on
updating
the
Received: 10 May 2022 Revised: 14 August 2022 Accepted: 1 September 2022
1Department of Ophthalmology, Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 20025, P. R. China and 2Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orbital
Diseases and Ocular Oncology, Shanghai 20025, P. R. China
Correspondence: Ai Zhuang (aizh9h@163.com) or Peiwei Chai (chaipeiwei123@sjtu.edu.cn) or Xianqun Fan (fanxq@sjtu.edu.cn)
These authors contributed equally: Ludi Yang, Ruobing Jia, Tongxin Ge.
www.nature.com/sigtrans
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
© The Author(s) 2022
1234567890();,:


--- Page 2 ---
understanding of these extrachromosomal particles. From the late
1970s to the 1980s, the existence of eccDNA was conﬁrmed in
various types of cancers and cancer cell lines.36 The Schimke
group was the ﬁrst to establish the connections between unstable
dihydrofolate reductase gene (DHFR) ampliﬁcation and DMs in
methotrexate (MTX)-resistant cells. This report provided a glimpse
into the biological functions of extrachromosomal DNA (ecDNA),
one type of eccDNA that will be discussed further below.37,38
Oncogene ampliﬁcations, such as MYC and EGFR, were found in
DMs as well.39–42 A work on drug resistance of glioma made
ecDNA obtain great attention in 2014. Oncogenic EGFRvIII was
found to primarily reside on extrachromosomes in glioblastoma
(GBM). The dynamic elimination and reappearance of oncogene-
ampliﬁed ecDNA contribute to targeted therapy resistance.43
Technological
advancements,
particularly
next-generation
sequencing and bioinformatics, have substantially broadened
our knowledge of eccDNA.44 Whole-genome sequencing (WGS),
along with optimized sequencing data analysis methods, provides
opportunities for mapping the landscape of eccDNA in both
human cancer and normal tissues. Systematic studies revealed
that ecDNA is common and abundant in cancer, although its
levels are highly heterogeneous.45–49 Additionally, eccDNA widely
exists in healthy human tissues and blood.50 New highly sensitive
methods for detecting and characterizing eccDNA, such as Circle-
seq, were subsequently developed and used in investigating the
yeast genome.14,51 In 2019, researchers rigorously validated the
circular structure of ecDNA and evaluated its chromatin state.2
Recently, the clinical impacts of ecDNA-based oncogene ampliﬁ-
cation have demonstrated that patients with tumors containing
ecDNA have poorer survival outcomes (Fig. 1).46
BIOGENESIS OF ECCDNA
EccDNAs are generated in multiple ways, following a context-
dependent
manner.
Although
the
precise
mechanisms
are
enigmatic, several models of eccDNA formation have been
proposed. The formation processes of eccDNA are generalized
into four categories: homologous recombination (HR), nonhomo-
logous end-joining (NHEJ), DNA replication, and the formation of
R-loops.23,26–28,30 HR and NHEJ are two major repair pathways of
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs).52 Studies have shown that HR
can excise repetitive DNA sequences during early development
and generate eccDNAs such as extrachromosomal rDNA circles
(ERCs) and telomeric circles (t-circles/c-circles).13 Furthermore,
depletion or inhibition of key proteins in NHEJ could trigger a
decrease in the amount of eccDNAs, indicating that NHEJ is
involved in the formation of eccDNA.53,54 In addition, polymerase
slippage at the short direct repeat sequence gives rise to DNA
loops in the process of DNA replication, and subsequent excision
of the loop leads to the formation of eccDNAs.55,56 Alternatively,
the formation of the R-loop in the process of transcription allows
the direct repeats on the unpaired strand to form into a loop
which can be excised and ligated into a circle.55 Moreover, the
widely accepted models for the speciﬁc ways in which eccDNA is
formed include the breakage-fusion-bridge (BFB) cycle, chromo-
thripsis, episome model, and translocation-deletion-ampliﬁcation
model.4,27,28,57
Breakage-fusion-bridge (BFB) cycle
BFB, ﬁrst conceptualized by Barbara McClintock in the 1930s, is
one model of the genome rearrangement process.58,59 The loss of
telomeres can cause end-to-end chromosome fusions, forming a
dicentric chromosome and developing into an anaphase bridge.60
This telomere-free bridge can be extended by replication and
randomly broken into fragments under stress, followed by
chromothripsis (discussed below) or another BFB cycle. BFB cycles
can result in genome instability and the release of eccDNAs
(Fig. 2a).26,61–63
Chromothripsis
Another model is the chromothripsis model, where chromosomes
are broken into pieces by a catastrophic event.64 Most of the DNA
fragments can be removed by the DNA repair system, while some
of the fragments can be ligated randomly (Fig. 2b).60,65 The
proposal of the model was prompted by the observation of
complex rearrangement in a patient with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Fragments may be tethered together to drive the
formation of ecDNAs carrying oncogenes by accident, which
might be tumorigenic.65–67 Similar phenomena were reported in
oligodendroglioma and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.68,69
Vogt et al. found that the small fragments on the chromosome
were associated with contigs in DMs. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and WGS revealed various junctions asso-
ciated with fusions between noncontiguous sequences in the
normal reference genome.68 Furthermore, studies suggest that
DNA damage, which is linked to the chromothripsis model, is
involved in the biogenesis of eccDNAs. Mehanna P et al. found
that eccDNAs are signiﬁcantly induced by chemotherapeutic-
induced apoptosis in lymphoblastoid cells.70 In addition, Sunner-
hagen P et al. demonstrated that the carcinogen, 7,1-dimethyl-
benzoanthracene, the DNA replication inhibitor, hydroxyurea (HU),
and the protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide, all promote
eccDNA production.71
Translocation-deletion-ampliﬁcation mechanism
The translocation-deletion-ampliﬁcation mechanism results from
exogenous stimuli and can be removed via the DNA repair system.
EccDNAs are derived from retained or cleaved DNA fragments
1964
First report of 
extrachromosomal 
circular DNA 
2017
Systematic description
of the existence and 
role of ecDNA in cancer
2015
Development of Circle-seq
1984
Discovery of
telomeric circles
2012
Discovery of microDNA
1972
Discovery of small 
polydispersed DNA
1997
Discovery of 
extrachromosomal
rDNA circles
1965
Discovery of 
double minutes
1979
Revealing the connections 
between unstable DHFR 
amplification and double minutes
in methotrexate-resistant cells
2018
2019
Mapping eccDNA in healthy 
human somatic tissue
Comprehensively resolving
the structure and basic 
function of ecDNA 
2014
Dynamic regulation of extra-
chromosomal EGFRvIII DNA 
mediating response of glioblastoma 
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
2020
EcDNA-based oncogene 
amplification predicting 
worse clinical outcomes
Fig. 1
Timeline of the milestone discoveries and research advances of eccDNA. After the ﬁrst discovery of eccDNA in 1964, multiple categories
of eccDNA in various species have been identiﬁed. With the development of high-throughput sequencing technologies, the biological
properties and functions of eccDNA have been deeply investigated
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
2
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 3 ---
formed during DNA damage repair (Fig. 2c). This model is
supported by the coampliﬁcation of MYC and ATBF1 in SJNB-12
cells, where a reciprocal translocation occurs between chromo-
somes 8 and 16, followed by excision and deletion near the
translocation breakpoint. The isolated sequences are ampliﬁed
and circularized to form eccDNAs.68 In addition, the translocation-
deletion-ampliﬁcation mechanism is also well suited to account
for the coampliﬁcation of HMGIC and MDM2 accompanied by
t(10;12)(p15;q15)
translocation
in
precancerous
pleomorphic
adenoma carcinomas.72
Episome model
The episome model is one of the classic models for the biogenesis
of eccDNA, where eccDNAs are produced by DNA slippage and
R-loops during the DNA synthesis process. These eccDNAs are also
named episomes. Episomes are able to self-replicate and can be
expanded by incorporating other DNA components, such as
transposable elements (TEs) and enhancers/promoters (Fig. 2d).
Storlazzi CT et al. showed that MYC-containing DMs in leukemia
cases are triggered by excision and ampliﬁcation, which underpins
the episome model. Additionally, they also investigated ten cell
lines from solid tumors and demonstrated that the MYC-contain-
ing ecDNAs are derived from excision and ampliﬁcation as well,
which expands the applicability of the episome model to solid
tumors.73 Furthermore, the formation of EGFR-containing ecDNAs
results in the generation of cancer-associated circular EGFR
amplicons, contributing to the oncogenic activation of EGFR.42
As the production of ERCs depends on DSB formation at the
replication fork barrier (RFB), it is possible that ERCs are released
from combined fork breakage at two neighboring replication
forks.74
MOLECULAR STRUCTURES OF ECCDNA
Since the discovery of eccDNA, emerging studies have system-
atically analyzed the structure of eccDNA.75–77 Advances in next-
generation sequencing technologies and computational analysis
technologies have revealed several key structural features of
eccDNA as follows: First, eccDNAs are circular and independently
replicate outside of chromosomes.2,78,79 A head-to-tail conﬁgura-
tion in the nucleotide sequence was detected through polymerase
chain reaction and mapping by restriction enzyme digestion of
eccDNA in a human neuroblastoma cell line.80 A recent study from
late 2019, which combined DNA sequencing and high-resolution
imaging, obtained deﬁnitive evidence of the circular shape of
eccDNA.2
Second, eccDNAs vary widely in size, from a few dozen base
pairs to hundreds of thousands of base pairs. The sizes and
features of eccDNAs vary in different life stages and tissues. Fetal-
derived eccDNAs are shorter and hypomethylated compared with
maternal eccDNAs.25,81 The methylation density of eccDNA is
positively correlated with its size. Recent studies have shown that
most eccDNAs in normal cells are less than 1000 bp in length.
Cancer cells have larger eccDNAs than normal cells (usually
greater than 1 kb), and these eccDNAs are long enough to carry
the full-length region for the ampliﬁcation of oncogenes.
Third, eccDNAs have different genetic contents, which consti-
tute the structural diversity of eccDNAs.19,82 According to their
genomic origins and genetic contents, eccDNAs can be categor-
ized into the following eight types: full-gene eccDNA, exon
eccDNA,
intron
eccDNA,
repeat
eccDNA,
repeat-intergenic
eccDNA, intergenic eccDNA, TE eccDNA, and promoter/enhancer
eccDNA (Fig. 3a). The structural diversity and topological structure
of eccDNA contribute to the versatility of its functions by possibly
driving the expression of coding RNAs, noncoding RNAs, and
other RNAs.26
Notably, compared to chrDNAs, eccDNAs mainly contain active
histone marks with a more accessible chromatin landscape.2,5,83
Immunoﬂuorescence analysis of active and repressive histone
marks and H3K4me1/H3K27ac ChIP-seq analyses of GBM39 cells
detected active histone marks on ecDNA in GBM39 cells. After
normalizing for DNA copy number, transcription was still at a high
level, suggesting that ecDNA has a highly accessible chromatin
state, which may contribute to the high transcription levels.2,46
In addition, eccDNAs appear to possess unusual structural
plasticity. Evidence suggests that eccDNA is able to reintegrate
into chromosomes and form homogeneously staining regions
(HSRs). A large number of factors can cause eccDNA to reintegrate
as HSRs, such as DNA damage, doxorubicin treatments, and
pharmacological poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) trapping.67,84
Studies have identiﬁed two major mechanisms by which eccDNA
is reintegrated into HSRs. (1) EccDNA segments are reintegrated
into chromosomes and ampliﬁed through BFB cycles, leading to
HSR formation. (2) HSRs can also be formed by reintegration of a
multimerized eccDNA originating from the episomes.85,86 Impor-
tantly, the reintegration of eccDNA into HSRs facilitates enhanced
stability and overexpression for these eccDNA-containing onco-
genes. For example, HU treatment can eliminate oncogene-
containing DMs but cannot decrease the copy number of
oncogenes ampliﬁed on HSRs.87 Furthermore, Richard P Koche
et al. found eccDNA fragments reintegration without HSR
formation, indicating that eccDNA can also be reintegrated into
chromosomes in the absence of HSRs.88 Additionally, reintegration
of eccDNA may lead to gene misregulation. Drug resistance-
related genes can be reintegrated into chromosomes via eccDNA,
allowing tumor cells to acquire drug resistance.38,89–91 EccDNA
inhibits the expression of tumor suppressor DCLK1 by inserting
itself into its gene body, while eccDNA also promotes oncogene
TERT
expression
by
integrating
itself
into
the
vicinity
of
oncogenes.88
CLASSIFICATIONS OF ECCDNA
Based on size and sequence, eccDNAs can be categorized into the
following ﬁve types: small polydispersed DNA (spcDNA), micro-
DNA, t-circle/c-circle, ERC, and ecDNA. These are described in
detail below (Table 1) (Fig. 3b).
Small polydispersed DNA (spcDNA)
SpcDNA is an obsolete concept to commonly characterize small
eccDNAs that are between hundreds of bp to a few thousand bp
and measure 0.05 to 2.00 μm.92 SpcDNA was ﬁrst observed in the
electron microscope examination of the closed DNA from
unfractionated HeLa cells in 1967.93 From the 1980s to the
1990s,
repetitive
sequences
were
widely
detected
in
spcDNAs,94–96 and therefore, it is speculated that spcDNA mainly
originates from repetitive regions in the genome.92 Studies have
shown that spcDNA can be found in a variety of eukaryotic cells.
SpcDNA is much more abundant in genetically unstable cells and
tissues, such as HeLa cells, ﬁbroblasts of Fanconi anemia, and
initiating carcinogen-treated cells.97 The occurrence of spcDNA
has been shown to be linked to genetic instability.
MicroDNA
MicroDNA, with an average length of 100 to 400 bp, is derived
from unique non-repetitive genomic regions with high gene
density. It is enriched in the 5′-untranslated regions of genes,
exons, and CpG islands.82 In terms of distribution, microDNAs are
ubiquitous in normal cells of every species, from yeast to
humans.98
Studies
have
shown
that
microDNA
levels
are
dependent on microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ),
inhibited by the c-NHEJ pathway, and stimulated by DNA
damage.99 Further study demonstrated that an increase in
microDNA size was observed in human lymphoblastoid cell lines
(LCLs) treated with two chemotherapeutic drugs compared with
their nontreated counterparts, which suggested a preferential
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
3
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 4 ---
origin of microDNAs from metabolically “active” chromatin sites.70
A recent study demonstrated that tumor cells could release
speciﬁc microDNAs into circulation, indicating that microDNAs
may have a role as an attractive biomarker for monitoring cancer
progression and therapeutic efﬁcacy.21
Telomeric circle (t-circle/c-circle)
Telomeric circles, as a special type of eccDNA, are duplex (t-circle)
or single-stranded (c-circle), consisting only of telomeric repeats.
They are integral multiples of 738 bp sequences. T-circles occur in
a wide range of organisms, including yeasts, plants, and animals.
Various DNA damage-associated proteins may regulate the
production of t-circles.100–105 For example, t-circle reduction by
knockdown of the Ku70/80 heterodimer caused a signiﬁcant
decrease in cell growth in SaOS2 osteosarcoma cells.106
Extrachromosomal rDNA circle (ERC)
ERCs have an average size of 19.3 to 40.4 kb. ERCs can be
produced by intramolecular HR of chromosomes and function as
templates for ribosomal RNA transcription.56,107,108 They are much
more abundant in healthy tissue.74 Additionally, ERCs can self-
replicate due to their autonomously replicating sequences.109
ERCs are involved in copy number variations. Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is able to respond to copy number loss with the clonal
ampliﬁcation of ERCs from chromosomal repeats. ERCs reinsert
themselves into the genome in a dosage-dependent manner in
response to catastrophic gene loss.74
Extrachromosomal DNA (ecDNA)
EcDNA was ﬁrst discovered as paired small chromatin bodies
in 1964 and was referred to as DMs.35 DMs were ﬁrst found
in metaphase neuroblastoma cells and subsequently found
in numerous types of cancers.36,110–112 With the combined
applications of WGS, structural modeling, and computa-
tional and cytogenetic analysis, Turner et al. analyzed 17
different cancer types and showed that only 30% of ecDNA
in tumor cells presents with DMs-like features. As this group
of eccDNAs can either be detected in a double-body form or
a single-body form, the deﬁnition of these extrachromoso-
mal particles needs to be broadened. Therefore, the term
ecDNA refers to those gene-containing extrachromosomal
particles of DNA with a size range from 1 to 3 Mb, including
both DMs and single-body forms.2
EcDNA lacks centromeres and segregates randomly or asym-
metrically during cell division. Gene sequences on ecDNA are
highly rearranged and ampliﬁed. It integrates multiple regions
scattered throughout different chromosomes in tumors.47,113 In
addition, breakpoints were found to be randomly distributed
around oncogenes.46 Hence, ecDNA is unlikely to have a uniﬁed
genome template. It may originate from several early genomic
a   BFB cycle
Telomere loss
Fusion
Breakage
BFB cycle
Repeating the cycle 
 and looping out
b   Chromothripsis
Chromosome
   breakages
Cyclization of 
centromere-deficient 
fragments
c   Translocation deletion amplification mechanism
Translocation
Segments near the
translocation breakage
Deletion
Amplification
Cyclization
d   Episome
a
b
c
d
Replication bubble 
      looping out
a b
c d
+
Enlargement
Episome
Centromere
Telomere
Stress
Stress
Stress
Fig. 2
Mechanisms of eccDNA formation. a “BFB cycle” model. A dicentric anaphase bridge forms in the absence of telomeres. The BFB cycle
involves an anaphase bridge, followed by bridge breakage under stress, releasing eccDNA. b “Chromothripsis” model. Single- or double-
stranded DNA breaks are formed under exogenous stress, and some of the fragments are ligated and circularized into eccDNA.
c “Translocation-deletion ampliﬁcation” model. Exogenous stimuli trigger chromosomal translocation. The DNA segments near the
translocation breakpoints are ampliﬁed, deleted, and circularized to form ecDNA. d “Episome” model. Episomes are produced by DNA
slippage and R-loops during the DNA synthesis process and are able to self-replicate and enlarge to form multimerized eccDNA
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
4
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 5 ---
events in a random manner and be selectively chosen during
tumor evolution.47 Furthermore, structural analysis demonstrates
that ecDNA evolves constantly via further fusion, rearrangement,
and mutation, which increases genomic diversity from another
aspect.68,88,114,115
REGULATORY MECHANISMS OF FUNCTIONAL ECCDNA
EccDNA contributes to gene ampliﬁcation and signaling pathway
regulation
Gene ampliﬁcation is a common molecular alteration in nearly all
kinds of cancers, and it provides cancer cells with selective growth
advantages.5,116 EccDNAs provide an effective method for gene
ampliﬁcation by increasing the copy number directly or acting as
trans-acting factors, such as super-enhancers2,45,117,118 (Fig. 4). In
yeast, eccDNAs are common, and their accumulation and loss
affect the copy number of genes carried.74,119 This will help yeast
respond rapidly to selective pressures and adapt to changing
environments.14,119
EccDNAs can exert vital biological functions through regulated
signaling pathways that inﬂuence oxidative stress, bystander
effects, and tumor progression.32 EccDNA contributes to radiation-
induced bystander effects by involving stress signaling. Irradiation
affects not only the cells traversed by the radiation track but also
non-irradiated
neighboring
cells,
a
response
described
as
radiation-induced bystander effects. Several studies have revealed
that eccDNAs released from dying irradiated cells can serve as a
stress signal that conveys a bystander effect. After the initial
irradiation, the irradiated cells executed apoptosis and released
oxidized eccDNA fragments, which induced sustained activation
of oxidative signaling pathways. Oxidized eccDNA fragments will
further interact with recipient bystander cells, causing secondary
oxidative stress in bystander cells. In turn, these cells initiate an
apoptotic
cascade
leading
to
the
release
of
oxidized
eccDNA.120–127
In addition, eccDNA involves in the regulation of many tumor-
related signaling pathways, such as the p53 pathway, MAPK/ERK
pathway, Ras, and PI3K/AKT pathway. Zhao X et al. performed
functional enrichment analyses through CircleBase, an integrated
resource and analysis platform for human eccDNAs. They revealed
that cancer cell eccDNAs were mainly enriched in oncogenic
pathways such as the Ras and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways.128
Studies have shown that eccDNA affects the expression of some
important components in signaling pathways. EccDNA can
signiﬁcantly elevate copy numbers of EGFR, MDM2, CDK4, and
BRAF in tumor cells, which implicates the regulation of the PI3K/
AKT pathway, p53 pathway, and MAPK/ERK pathway.2,129,130
Moreover, eccDNA can also be regulated by several canonical
signaling pathways. Sun et al. found that the stability of DMs in
tumor cells is related to ERK1/2 activation. Inhibition of ERK1/2
activation
and
constitutive
phosphorylation
of
ERK1/2
can
signiﬁcantly reduce the number of DMs and the expression of
DM-carrying genes in tumor cells.131
EccDNA participates in restoring telomere length
T-circles contribute to the alternative lengthening of telomeres
(ALT), which is important in cancer cell proliferation.132–134 Tumor
cells limit the telomere length by telomere trimming from the
chromosome
ends,
which
is
mediated
by
the
release
of
t-circles.135,136 Yu et al. detected high levels of t-circles in patients
with high-risk neuroblastoma, which are associated with active
“telomere trimming”.137 Another study revealed that trimming
activity in neuroblastoma triggers rapid telomere deletion and
increases
the
number
of
t-circles,
promoting
extensive
proliferation.138 Meanwhile, t-circles are involved in the ALT to
prevent the shortening of cancer telomeres. Telomerase-negative
a
b
c d
e
f
g
h
i
a
e
c
d
f
g
j
h
i
i
j
Full gene eccDNA
Exon eccDNA
Intron eccDNA
Repeat eccDNA
e
h
Repeat-intergenic eccDNA
Intergenic eccDNA
TE, promoter or 
enhancer eccDNA
Gene
Exon
Repeat
TE, promoter 
or enhancer
Intergenic region
a
b
19 Kb to 40 Kb
Integral multiples of 738 bp
1 Mb to 3 Mb
Telomeric repeats
100 bp to 10 Kb
ecDNA
ERC
t-circles
c-circles
spcDNA
b
d
100 bp to 400 bp
5’ UTR
CpG
microDNA
Fig. 3
Structures and biological features of eccDNA. a Based on genomic origin and genetic content, eccDNAs are categorized into the
following types: full-gene eccDNA, exon eccDNA, intron eccDNA, repeat eccDNA, repeat-intergenic eccDNA, intergenic eccDNA, TE, promoter
or enhancer eccDNA. b Based on size and sequence, eccDNAs are categorized into the following types: small polydispersed DNA (spcDNA),
microDNA, telomeric circle (t-circle/c-circle), extrachromosomal rDNA circle (ERC), and extrachromosomal DNA (ecDNA). The main elements
and structures of eccDNAs are shown
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
5
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 6 ---
immortalized human cells maintain their telomeres by ALT. Yeager
TR et al. found that ALT cells contain the ALT-associated
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) body (APB), which is composed of
telomeric DNA and telomere-associated proteins. The presence of
APB correlates with the activation of ALT.136,139–142
EccDNA involves in genome plasticity and adaptive evolution
Due to genomic and spatial mobility, eccDNA possesses the
capacity for adaptive evolution and genomic plasticity.57 Studies
have shown that eccDNA is associated with drug resistance by
regulating drug resistance-related genes, asymmetrical segrega-
tion, or the shift between eccDNA and HSR. EGFRvIII oncogenic
variant tumor cells are sensitive to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). Tumor cells can reversibly regulate mutant EGFR expression,
conferring distinct cellular phenotypes to adapt to environmental
change. Speciﬁcally, GBM cells eliminate mutant EGFR from
eccDNAs when exposed to TKIs. Moreover, clonal EGFR mutation
reappears on eccDNAs after drug discontinuation.43 In melanoma,
the ampliﬁcations of BRAFV600E are highly plastic under MAPK
inhibitor treatment through the involvement of de novo genomic
alterations.130
In terms of genomic plasticity, eccDNAs also participate in gene
compensation. HTA1-HTB1 and HTA2-HTB2 are the two gene pairs
that encode histones H2A and H2B. The HTA2-HTB2 dose
compensates at the transcriptional level when HTA1-HTB1 is
deleted.143 Libuda DE et al. further revealed that dose compensa-
tion of HTA2-HTB2 occurs by generating an eccDNA carrying HTA2-
HTB2, the histone H3-H4 locus, a centromere, and the origin of
replication when HTA1-HTB1 is absent.144
EccDNA serves as a molecular sponge
Increasing evidence has proven that eccDNAs can be transcribed
into regulatory RNAs that sponge transcription factors. MicroDNAs
can
be
transcribed
independently
of
canonical
promoter
sequences in vitro and in vivo. As microDNAs are not long
enough to carry full protein-coding genes, they usually serve as
regulators in a diverse spectrum of biological processes. Micro-
DNAs express regulatory short RNAs, including microRNAs and
novel si-like RNAs, which elicit changes in cell phenotype by
regulating gene expression.98 Yerlici VT et al. discovered that a
large number of eccDNAs were generated during genome
rearrangement and that these eccDNAs served as templates for
the transcription of rearrangement-speciﬁc long noncoding RNAs
(lncRNAs).12
PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF ECCDNA
Recently, eccDNA has become a hot topic in the scientiﬁc ﬁeld,
with increasing publications indicating its involvement in a variety
of biological processes. Previous studies have shown that the
functions of eccDNAs depend on the gene contents and the
structures of the molecular elements. It is necessary to explore the
biological functions of eccDNAs to further understand the
development and progression of diseases28,44,56,145 (Fig. 5).
EccDNA determines cellular behavior
Studies have shown that eccDNAs affect phenotypes in many
ways. It has been widely reported that a high copy number of
eccDNA results in oncogene overexpression, which is related to
the malignant
tumor phenotype.
Gemcitabine
reduces
the
amount of DMs in the ovarian cancer cell line UACC-1598, which
results in reduced cancer cell growth, colony formation, and
invasion.146 Furthermore, the proliferative activity of cells was
reduced after the elimination of MYCN-containing eccDNAs.147
EccDNAs also regulate animal phenotypes by reintegrating into
chromosomes. Cattle color sidedness (Cs), as a dominantly
inherited trait, is determined by homologous yet non-syntenic
Cs alleles. EccDNAs serve as circular intermediates, contributing to
the translocation of KIT-containing DNA fragments.148 For plants,
EPSPS gene ampliﬁcation through eccDNAs confers herbicide
resistance to Amaranthus palmeri.149,150
EccDNA regulates immunity
EccDNA plays an important role in triggering innate immunity. The
superior innate immune-stimulating ability of eccDNA has been
detected. EccDNA can regulate the production of proinﬂammatory
cytokines. EccDNA, enriched with CpG-rich genomic DNA frag-
ments, can serve as TLR9 ligands, which increase cell production
of IL-6 and TNF-α via activation of the TLR9-MyD88-NF-κB
signaling pathway. However, CpG-unenriched eccDNA cannot
stimulate the synthesis of IL-6 and TNF-α.151,152 As a part of the
innate immune response, cells can react to naked DNA in the
cytoplasm by activating the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)
pathway, leading to stimulation of the immune system. EccDNA
may act as an important source of immunostimulatory DNA to
activate cGAS-STING innate immune signaling.153–156 Furthermore,
eccDNAs were able to induce higher levels of cytokines than linear
genomic DNA fragments of the same size. When eccDNAs were
cleaved into corresponding linear genomic DNA fragments, their
strong ability to stimulate an immune response was lost,
indicating that the potent immunostimulatory ability of eccDNA
depends on its circular structure and cytosolic DNA sensor
Sting.157 Recently, a study demonstrated that the existence of
ecDNA in tumors was negatively correlated with the degree of
immune inﬁltration. Tumor cells may employ ecDNA to decrease
immunogenicity and evade immune surveillance.158
EccDNA associates with development and aging
EccDNA is involved in the development of vertebrates. In Xenopus
laevis, t-circles speciﬁcally form at the early embryonic stage and
are gradually eliminated during normal developmental pro-
cesses.17,18,159 Recent evidence suggests that eccDNA is also
Table 1.
The unique characteristics and functions of different types of eccDNAs
Classiﬁcation
Size
Common distribution Function
Reference
SpcDNA
100 bp to 10 kb
Unstable cells
Contribute to genomic instability
92–97
MicroDNA
100 bp to 400 bp
Tumor cells
Serve as regulators in a diverse spectrum of biological
processes
21,70,82,98,99
Telomeric circles Integral multiples of
738 bp
ALT cells
Contribute to telomeric maintenance and cell proliferation
100–106
ERC
19 kb to 40 kb
Normal cells
Contribute to ribosomal RNA transcription
56,74,107–109
EcDNA
1 Mb to 3 Mb
Tumor cells
Contribute to oncogene ampliﬁcation and genetic
heterogeneity
2,46,47,68,88,113–115
EccDNA extrachromosomal circular DNA, SpcDNA small polydispersed DNA, ERC extrachromosomal rDNA circles, EcDNA extrachromosomal DNA, ALT
alternative lengthening of telomeres
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
6
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 7 ---
associated with aging.13,44,160 First, eccDNA accumulates drama-
tically as cells age in yeast and mammals. Kunisada T et al.
analyzed the aging process of rat lymphocytes and human lung
ﬁbroblasts and found that the size and copy number of eccDNA
increased.160 Sinclair DA et al. showed that the accumulation of
ERCs is a general phenomenon that occurs in aging yeast cells.
These ERCs are able to replicate with an autonomously replicating
sequence (ARS), and they are preferentially segregated to mother
cells in each cell division. Such asymmetrical segregation results in
a marked increase in ERCs in aging mother cells and limits the
amount of ERCs in daughter cells. It has been detected that aging
yeast mother cells typically exhibit progressive enlargement and
fragmentation of the nucleolus due to the accumulation of
ERCs.161 Furthermore, such accumulation is more obvious after
Sgs1 mutations, but the lack of Fob1 and Bud6 will reduce the
accumulation of ERCs and extend life.107,162–164
TOOLS AND METHODS FOR STUDYING ECCDNA
High-throughput technologies and validation methods
EccDNA could be reconstructed by analyzing WGS data. The
detection of extremely ampliﬁed and rearranged regions featuring
discordant paired-end reads and split reads in the tumor genome
hints at the existence of circular DNA, which can be inferred and
resolved by bioinformatic analysis tools, such as AmpliconArch-
itect and AmpliconReconstructor.2,45,47,113,165 However, bioinfor-
matics algorithms based on WGS tend to leave out large numbers
of low-frequency eccDNA. Circle-seq, a puriﬁcation and detection
method, was developed to screen for a novel or low abundant
eccDNA in the genomic range. The research in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae provides a universal tool for investigating the relation-
ship between copy number variation and eccDNA in other
models.14 The results of these two methods is highly consistent
in large eccDNA. However, small eccDNAs presented with different
results according to Circle-seq and WGS. Therefore, it is necessary
to integrate results from both WGS and Circle-seq, beneﬁting a
comprehensive and accurate characterization of eccDNA.46,88
CIDER-Seq is another novel circular DNA detection method based
on randomly primed circular DNA ampliﬁcation, followed by long-
read single-molecule sequencing. Long-read sequencing could
overcome
the
shortcomings
of
the
short-read
sequencing
methods we aforementioned, which fail to accurately resolve
the complicated architecture of ecDNA.4,166,167 Nevertheless, this
method cannot guarantee the accuracy of detecting eccDNA
larger than 8 to 10 kb.51 In addition, ATAC-seq data could be
reanalyzed by Circle_ﬁnder to identify eccDNA.49 Other high-
throughput methods, especially epigenetic techniques, are quite
useful for exploring the topological structure and function of
eccDNA. ChIP-seq, PLAC-seq, ATAC-seq, MNase-seq, 4C-seq, and
Hi-C have been used to reveal the chromatin accessibility and
nucleosome compaction state of eccDNA.2,166 Moreover, com-
bined analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the RNA-seq
and WGS data could distinguish whether the transcripts are
derived from genes on eccDNA or from linear chromosomes.2
After prediction, inverse PCR and Sanger sequencing could be
adopted to verify the circularity of putative eccDNA. Outward PCR
will amplify the desired products if a circular structure does exist.
The
junction
points
could
be
conﬁrmed
by
aligning
the
sequencing data to the reference genome.2
Imaging and visualization methods
Microscopic imaging has made a huge contribution to the
discovery of eccDNA historically. The presence of mammalian
DNA in a circular conﬁguration was ﬁrst identiﬁed by electron
microscopy.33 Contemporaneously, when examining the karyo-
type of surgically removed tumor tissues, researchers observed
large molecular weight eccDNA, minute double chromatin bodies
stained with DNA dye in mitotic metaphase cells under light
microscopy.35 Recent advances in imaging focus on depicting
eccDNA at high resolution by structured illumination microscopy
and atomic force microscopy.63,168 In addition, Yi E et al. utilized a
CRISPR dCas9-based DNA labeling system to visualize the
spatiotemporal dynamics of eccDNA in live cells. Single-guide
RNA targeting eccDNA-speciﬁc breakpoint junctions can introduce
ﬂuorescent tags to eccDNA and track the uneven segregation
behaviors of eccDNA during mitosis.169
The links between copy number variation and eccDNA are often
neglected. Compared with genome sequencing, which has high
sequence resolution, FISH can visually show the intracellular
position of target genes. It is contrary to common sense that many
highly ampliﬁed oncogenes actually reside in eccDNA instead of
linear chromosomes.43,169 Furthermore, advanced tools, namely,
Enhancer 1
Enhancer 2
Oncogene
Insulator
mRNA
Centromere
a   Local enhancer hijacking
b   Distal enhancer hijacking
c   EccDNA–chromosomal DNA interaction
d   EccDNA–ecDNA interaction
Chromosomal DNA
EccDNA
Fig. 4
EccDNA enables distal DNA interactions. a Oncogene segments and enhancers from adjacent topologically related domains can join
together into a circle. b EccDNA integrates oncogene segments and distant enhancers to form an ecDNA circle. c, d EccDNA serves as a mobile
enhancer that interacts with both chromosomal DNA (c) and other eccDNA (d)
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
7
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 8 ---
ECdetect and ecSeg, for analyzing microscopic images have been
developed recently (Fig. 6).45,78
EccDNA resources
With the rapid development of high-throughput sequencing and
bioinformatics analysis technologies, it has been shown that
eccDNAs are widespread in human disease. This illustrates the
need to establish eccDNA-related databases. Zhao et al. con-
structed a public database, CircleBase for the annotation and
functional analysis of eccDNA in various human cells. CircleBase,
equipped with highly interactive eccDNA visualization capabilities,
can identify functional eccDNAs by combining
sequencing
datasets, computational predictions, and manual annotations
and provide comprehensive eccDNA annotation.128 Peng et al.
constructed a database of eccDNA proﬁles in human cancers
named “eccDNAdb”. This database provides not only basic
information and annotations of eccDNA but also the prognostic
value of eccDNA genes.170
ECCDNA IN HUMAN CANCERS
EccDNA, especially ecDNA, is widespread in nearly half of human
cancers, following a context-depedent manner across diversiﬁed
cancer categories.45 The unique structure and molecular char-
acteristics enable a highly spatial and temporal plasticity of
eccDNA functions, which determines the pathogenesis of cancer
initiation, progression, and evolution.3,171–173 (Tables 2, 3 and
Fig. 7a).
EccDNA in cancer initiation
Oncogene ampliﬁcation, as one of the most common molecular
alterations in cancer, plays an important role in tumorigenesis by
providing cancer cells with selective growth advantages.174–179
EccDNA promotes oncogene ampliﬁcation and induces cancer
initiation by serving as a template for directing the transcription of
oncogenes,
altering
the
landscape
of
regulatory
elements,
enhancing
chromatin
accessibility,
and
inducing
genomic
remodeling.
EccDNA serves as a template for oncogene transcription.
Contain-
ing more than one full gene and regulatory regions, eccDNA can
encode genes, especially bona ﬁde oncogenes. MYC family
proteins (MYC, MYCN, and MYCL) are major drivers of human
tumorigenesis.180–183 MYC proteins regulate the expression of
multiple genes and affect multiple biological processes, including
cell proliferation, growth, senescence, metabolism, differentiation,
and apoptosis.184–186 Genome alterations in MYC family genes,
particularly gene ampliﬁcations, are recognized as early events in
a wide variety of cancers, leading to dysregulations of cell
functions that result in embryonal or cancer stem-like qualities,
such as increased self-renewal, apoptotic resistance, and meta-
bolic ﬂexibility.187–192 In neuroblastomas, MYCN ampliﬁcation has
been detected in over 20% of neuroblastomas patients.193–198
Prior research generally conﬁrms that eccDNA drives copy number
ampliﬁcation of MYCN in neuroblastoma. In the 1960s, eccDNA
was ﬁrst discovered in metaphase spreads of neuroblastoma cells.
Numerous eccDNAs in the form of DMs were detected, with no
evidence of other chromosomal breaks. Subsequently, in the
1980s, NE et al. further observed the ampliﬁed DNA sequences
from human neuroblastoma cell lines to explore the role of gene
ampliﬁcation in maintaining the phenotype of neuroblastomas.
They detected a new oncogene called MYCN, whose ampliﬁcation
sequence was located on DMs in the human neuroblastoma cell
line IMR-32.39 More recently, a genome-wide landscape of
extrachromosomal DNA circularization in neuroblastoma con-
ﬁrmed
that
the
MYCN
gene
is
ampliﬁed
on
eccDNA
in
neuroblastoma199 (Fig. 7). Moreover, it has been detected that
eccDNA contains ampliﬁed MYC in leukemia.200–202 L Abbate A
et al. performed a range of high-resolution genomic methods and
revealed a large cohort of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases
harboring MYC ampliﬁcation in the form of DM, HSR, and ring
chromosomes.203,204 Besides, several studies have also detected
MYC-containing eccDNA in GBM, colon cancer, and ovarian
cancer.2,147,205
EGFR is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) that is involved in the
regulation of the cell cycle, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and cellular
proliferation.206–209 EGFR ampliﬁcation has been reported to play
eccDNA
Molecular
Physiological
Immunity
Fig. 5
The molecular and physiological functions of eccDNAs. EccDNA regulates diversiﬁed molecular and physiological processes.
Mechanistically, eccDNA plays an important role in gene ampliﬁcation, telomere length restoration, genome plasticity, and molecular sponge.
EccDNA also plays an important role in multiple physiological events, including cellular behavior, immunity, and aging
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
8
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 9 ---
an important role in cancer initiation.210–214 In GBM, oncogene
ampliﬁcation is the most frequent gain-of-function alteration,
which enables tumor cells to circumvent the checks and balances
that are in place during homeostasis, thereby driving tumorigen-
esis.215,216 Among them, ampliﬁcation of EGFR is the most
common molecular hallmark of GBM, which is detected in
approximately 40–50% of primary GBM patients.217–220 Wu et al.
demonstrated that eccDNAs in the GBM cell lines encode EGFR as
well as other oncogenes, such as MYC, CDK4, and MDM2, which
account for the top 1% of genes expressed in the cancer genome.
They further showed that oncogenes ampliﬁed by eccDNAs have
higher copy numbers than the same genes ampliﬁed by linear
chromosomes.2
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) plays an
important role in cell growth and differentiation.221 It affects the
activation of the MAPK pathway and PI3K pathway, which are
associated with tumorigenicity.222–225 Approximately 25% of
breast cancers overexpress HER2.226–231 Studies have shown that
eccDNA is involved in HER2 ampliﬁcation in breast cancer. Vicario
R et al. detected that HER2 ampliﬁcation in DMs or in HSR occurs in
30 and
60% of HER2-positive
breast
cancers,
respectively,
indicating that different mechanisms of HER2 gene ampliﬁcation
exist in breast cancer.232
The eukaryotic initiation factor eIF-5A2 has been reported to be
an oncogenic protein in multiple human cancers.233–236 Accumu-
lated evidence suggests that eIF-5A2 initiates tumor formation,
enhances cancer cell growth, and increases cancer cell metas-
tasis.146,237,238 Guan XY et al. showed that eIF-5A2 is ampliﬁed in
the ovarian cancer cell line UACC-1598 in the form of DMs.146
Conclusively, ampliﬁcation of oncogenes on eccDNA provides a
novel theoretical basis for explaining tumorigenicity.
EccDNA alters the regulatory element landscapes.
In addition to
increased copy numbers, transcriptional activity may be the result
of alterations in regulatory element landscapes.2 The amplicon
structure and the chimeric circularization elements can promote
oncogene expression through regulation in the noncoding
genome.239
First, eccDNA may act as a powerful enhancer hijacking element
in cancer. In neuroblastoma, Helmsauer K et al. analyzed the MYCN
amplicon structure and chromatin landscape of ecDNA by using
short-read sequencing, Nanopore sequencing, ChIP-seq, ATAC-
seq, and Hi-C. They showed two enhancer hijacking models of
eccDNA
to explain
the
regulatory
requirements
for
MYCN
overexpression.
In
the
ﬁrst
type,
a
proximal
enhancer
is
coampliﬁed, triggered by the noradrenergic core regulatory circuit
(CRC). In the second type, MYCN amplicons are characterized by
the presence of distal chromosomal fragments harboring CRC-
driven enhancers.166 Likewise, the local enhancer hijacking is also
involved in EGFR ampliﬁcation in GBM.239 Morton et al. revealed
EGFR amplicon patterns in eccDNA from primary GBM sequencing.
They demonstrated the coampliﬁcation of EGFR and its upstream
enhancer on ecDNA, where the new enhancer–oncogene contacts
contribute to cancer cell growth.240 Considering that no break-
points were detected between EGFR and its two upstream
enhancers, it is suggested that the incorporation of endogenous
enhancers is not only advantageous for GBM cell survival, but also
required for oncogene selection. It can be concluded that the
chimeric circularization can be generated by a selective pressure
to amplify proto-oncogenes together with suitable regulatory
elements.
Moreover,
the
proto-oncogenes
share
the
same
regulatory neighborhood by residing side-by-side on the same
DNA. The enhancer hijacking models may extend to other cancers
High-throughput technology
Imaging and visualization
LM
EM
FISH
Sanger sequencing
A G T G T A C G A A C C
Junction
Inverse PCR
Junction
Junction
Short-read sequencing 
(WGS)
DNA isolation
Normal sample
Tumor sample
Purification & enrichment
Linear DNA digestion
Rolling-circle amplification
Validation
4C-seq, etc.
RNA-seq, etc.
Gene transcription level
A
AA
A
A
A
AA
A
A
A
AA
A
A
A
AA
A
A
A
AA
A
A
Distant chromatin contacts
ChIP-seq, etc.
Histone marks
ac H3K27ac
me H3K4me1
Chromatin accessibility
ATAC-seq, etc.
......
Reference genome
Reference genome
Discordant pair-end read 
Split read
Regular pair-end read 
Long read
Junction
Reference genome
Long-read sequencing
(CIDER-seq, etc.)
Short-read sequencing
(Circle-seq, etc.)
Bioinformatics analysis
Sectioning
Fig. 6
Tools and methods in the exploration of eccDNA. High-throughput technologies have been applied to detect the existence and
structure of eccDNA. EccDNAs can be reconstructed by analyzing data from short-read sequencing, including whole-genome sequencing and
Circle-seq, along with long-read sequencing by a bioinformatics algorithm. Other epigenetic techniques, such as ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq, and 4C-
seq, assist in the exploration of the topological structure. Notably, inverse PCR and Sanger sequencing have been applied in the validation of
eccDNA. Light microscopy (LM), electron microscopy (EM), and ﬂuorescence microscopy are involved in the visualization of eccDNA and
relevant genetic ampliﬁcations
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
9
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 10 ---
and contribute to identifying relevant loci in the various complex
aberrations that drive cancers.
Second, eccDNA serves as a mobile enhancer that interacts with
chrDNA or other eccDNA in cancer. Zhu et al. identiﬁed various
trans-interaction sites using ChIA-Drop chromatin interaction
assays and ChIA-PET, which indicates that ecDNA can interact
with genome-wide DNA as a mobile enhancer.83
In addition, ecDNAs are able to trans-activate the oncogene
expression by forming hubs. A recent study showed that the
ampliﬁcation of MYC in colon cancer is triggered by ecDNA hubs.
These ecDNA hubs are bound by the bromodomain and
extraterminal domain protein BRD4 and enable intermolecular
enhancer and gene interactions to promote MYC overexpression.
Inhibition of BRD4 has been shown to have the ability to
disaggregate ecDNA hubs and reduce ecDNA-derived MYC
expression.205 The discovery of ecDNA hubs in colon cancer has
signiﬁcant implications for understanding how ecDNA undergoes
selection and how ecDNA regulates transcription. Furthermore, it
is proposed that ecDNA hubs can effectively recruit a large
number of RNA polymerases and transcription factor complexes to
form
molecular
condensates
as
a
separate
phase
in
the
nuclei.83,169 The concept of “ecDNA-associated phase separation”
provides novel insights into oncogenesis.
Furthermore, the function of eccDNA noncoding sequences in
oncogene ampliﬁcation has been characterized. Jin et al. used
bioinformatics analysis and revealed that the 682 kb DMs in
ovarian cancer harbors ﬁve matrix attachment regions (MARs). PCR
analysis showed that these MARs can bind to the nuclear matrix
in vivo, indicating that they are functional. Measured by luciferase
assay, increased oncogene expression was detected following the
transfection of MARs constructs, indicating that noncoding
regions on DMs regulate gene expression and are involved in
oncogene activation.241 Ultimately, they concluded that high
oncogene expression cannot be achieved by oncogene ampliﬁca-
tion alone, but with coampliﬁcation by MAR elements.
EccDNA enhances chromatin accessibility.
EccDNA has a highly
accessible chromatin state that enables distal DNA interactions
and promotes oncogene ampliﬁcation, which contributes to
cancer initiation. Wu et al. demonstrated the presence of active
histone marks on GBM39 ecDNA and the absence of repressive
histone marks. The results from ATAC-seq and MNase-seq
revealed that the chromatin landscape of ecDNA is more
accessible than chrDNA due to its less compacted nucleosomal
organization.2 Studies of eccDNA have uncovered an insightful
layer of regulatory complexity in tumorigenicity, which may
provide
access
for
the
targeted
disruption
of
oncogene
ampliﬁcation.
EccDNA involves in genomic remodeling.
EccDNA is a major
source of somatic rearrangements in various types of cancer,
resulting in oncogenic remodeling through reintegration into the
linear genome.88 Reintegration of eccDNA could cause gene
dysregulation, resulting in the defective balance of proto-
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, which further contri-
butes to tumorigenesis.242 In leukemia, Von Hoff DD et al. used gel
electrophoresis techniques to locate the ampliﬁed MYC oncogene
sequences in leukemia cells. With increased passages in culture,
the ampliﬁed MYC shifted from DMs to a chromosomal site and
was accompanied by a shortened cell doubling time, suggesting
that eccDNA actively regulates expression levels by genome
rearrangements.243 A study in neuroblastoma further showed that
the expression of oncogenes such as TERT was markedly increased
because of the integration of eccDNA into the vicinity of
oncogenes, while the expression of the tumor suppressor DCLK1
was repressed due to the integration of circle fragments into the
gene body88 (Fig. 7b).
EccDNA in cancer progression
The accumulation of eccDNAs in cells affects the malignant
phenotype of tumors. Notably, patients with more oncogene
Table 2.
Summary of the roles of eccDNA in development
Cancer type
Genes on eccDNA
Functions
Reference
Pancancer
EGFR, MYC,
CDK4, MDM2
intratumoral heterogeneity, copy number alteration
2,281
Neuroblastoma
MYCN
copy number alteration, distal DNA interaction,
reintegration into chromosomes
199
Glioblastoma
MYC, EGFR, PDGFRα, ERBB2, CDK4, MDM2
copy number alteration, distal DNA interaction
2,43,259
Colon cancer
MYC
copy number alteration
249
Breast Cancer
Ovarian cancer
HER2, PIP
eIF-5A2, MYC
copy number alteration, genetic instability
copy number alteration
232,315
146,250
Leukemia
MYC
copy number alteration, reintegration into chromosomes
147,249
Melanoma
BRAF
copy number alteration, reintegration into chromosomes
130
Table 3.
Summary of eccDNA-related drug resistance
Cancer type
Drug-resistance genes Drugs or treatment Functions
Reference
Glioblastoma
EGFR
Erlotinib
Irradiation
The mutations of EGFR ampliﬁed by eccDNA are dynamically
regulated to evade therapy
43
Colon cancer
DHFR
Methotrexate
DHFR-carrying eccDNA contributes to MTX resistance
53,266,267
Cervical cancer
DHFR
Methotrexate
DHFR-carrying eccDNA contributes to MTX resistance
316
Oral squamous cell
carcinoma
MDR1
Hydroxyurea
Loss of MDR1-carrying eccDNA promotes drug sensitivity
273
Melanoma
BRAFV600E
Vemurafenib,
Selumetinib
Focal ampliﬁcations contribute to drug resistance
130
MTX methotrexate
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
10
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 11 ---
ampliﬁcation on eccDNA had signiﬁcantly worse 5-year survival
outcomes, indicating that the abundance of oncogene-containing
eccDNA was associated with tumor aggressiveness. Simulation
models showed that tumors carrying a circular amplicon have
higher cellular proliferation scores and lower immune inﬁltration
scores.46,244 Subsequently, a series of studies were carried out to
explore the molecular characteristics of eccDNA in tumors.
Computational analysis of WGS data performed by Kim H. et al.
showed that circular amplicons of ecDNA are more prevalent in
aggressive cancers such as GBM.46
MYC, EGFRvIII, PDGFRα
ERBB2, CDK4, MDM2
DHFR, HER2
MYC, eIF-5A2
MDR1
DHFR, MYC
MYCN, TERT, DCLK1
Neuroblastoma
Glioblastoma
Oral squamous 
cell carcinoma
BRAFV600E
Melanoma
Ovarian cancer
Breast cancer
DHFR
Cervical cancer
Colon cancer
MYC
Leukemia
Downregulation of DCLK1 by reintegration
Upregulation of TERT by reintegration
DCLK1
TERT
Downregulation of DCLK1 
Upregulation of TERT
mRNA
mRNA
Amplification of MYCN via eccDNA
Normal cell
Neuroblastoma cell
eccDNA
eccDNA 
containing MYCN
a
b
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
11
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 12 ---
Notably, studies have demonstrated that elimination of tumor
eccDNA reduces oncogene ampliﬁcation, thereby reverting the
tumor malignant phenotype. In neuroblastoma, Ambros IM et al.
revealed that extrachromosomally ampliﬁed MYCN copies can be
eliminated from the nucleus in ﬂat cells (F-cells). The reduction of
ampliﬁed sequences in F-cells results in a decreased proliferative
activity and upregulated expression of the major histocompat-
ibility complex class I (MHC I).31 In vitro treatment with drugs such
as HU induce the micronucleus formation and thus expulsion of
ampliﬁed genes, triggering efﬁcient anti-cancer efﬁcacy in multi-
ple maligancies.31,153,245,246 Recently, neuroblastoma cell lines
with DMs exhibited enlarged and ﬂattened morphology and
increased
granularity,
and
expressed
senescence-associated-
β-galactosidase (SA-β-GAL) when exposed to low-dose HU,
suggesting that low-dose HU can serve as an effective senescence
activator for neuroblastoma cells with DMs.247,248
Additionally, DMs in colon cancer can be removed from the
nucleus by budding of the nuclear membrane during S-phase. Cell
synchronization and bromodeoxyuridine-pulse labeling indicate
de novo bud and micronucleus formation in S-phase, which are
regulated by the p53 pathway. However, it has been further
demonstrated that HU treatment eliminated oncogene-containing
DMs but did not decrease the copy number of oncogenes
ampliﬁed on HSRs, which indicates that oncogene ampliﬁcation is
more stable on HSRs, rather than on ecDNAs.87 Another study
showed that HU is able to eliminate DMs with ampliﬁed copies of
MYC in colon cancer, leading to a reduction in tumorigenicity.249
Overall, drugs that promote S-phase budding may be valuable in
the treatment of colon cancer. However, the efﬁcacy is limited by
the dynamic shifting between DMs and HSR.
In ovarian cancer, Guan et al. studied the correlation between
the reduction of eIF-5A2 copy number and cell growth rate and
showed that the cell growth rate was inhibited when the eIF-5A2
copy number of DMs was reduced.250 Yu et al. found that
gemcitabine is able to decrease the number of DMs in the ovarian
cancer cell line UACC-1598. Cells treated with gemcitabine
showed reduced cell growth, colony formation, and invasion,
indicating that gemcitabine affects the biology of ovarian cancer
cells by decreasing the number of DMs.251
Previous studies in leukemia suggested that an independent
active process may naturally exist in HL-60 cells to eliminate the
extrachromosomal ampliﬁcation of MYC and that this process can
be enhanced by drugs including a low dose of HU or dimethyl
sulfoxide.252 A low dose of HU increases the percentage of
spontaneously differentiated cells where the ampliﬁcation of MYC
is decreased by entrapment within micronuclei.147,249 Under-
standing the molecular mechanisms of the natural elimination
process has important implications for drug intervention in
leukemia.
EccDNA in cancer evolution
EccDNA drives tumor heterogeneity.
Tumor bulk is a collection of
cell populations with genetic, phenotypic, and behavioral hetero-
geneity.253,254 Available evidence suggests that clonal evolution is
likely mediated by eccDNA, especially ecDNA. EcDNA is thought to
be acentric and unevenly separate into daughter cells at cell
division.169,255–257 Live-cell imaging was applied during mitosis
and showed disjointed ecDNA inheritance patterns.169 Single-cell
analyses of a patient-based xenograft model showed that the ratio
of EGFRvIIIHigh/EGFRvIIILow cells in the subcutaneous GBM formed
by FACS-sorted EGFRvIIIHigh or EGFRvIIILow seeds was the same.
However, EGFRvIII heterogeneity caused by ecDNAs was comple-
tely different under continuous drug selection. This result
suggested a distinct pattern of ecDNAs distribution to daughter
cells, which does not follow Mendel’s law of inheritance and
thereby create heterogeneous cell populations. Subsequently,
speciﬁc subpopulations were screened out by an ever-changing
external microenvironment to maximize the chances of survival.43
A simulation model also predicts that the oncogene copy
numbers on ecDNA could rapidly reach to and maintain a highly
variable state in this way.45 Increased intratumoral genetic
heterogeneity will provide tumors with extra survival advantages
to cope with external pressure.43,89,258
EccDNA involves in drug resistance.
Studies have shown that
changes in the cellular composition mediated by eccDNA facilitate
drug resistance and thereby dictate a patient response. In GBM,
Nathanson DA. et al. found that resistance to TKIs in preclinical
models and GBM patients is related to a decreasing ratio of
EGFRvIIIHigh/EGFRvIIILow tumor cells. Such regulation is achieved by
the elimination and reemergence of EGFRvIII from eccDNA.43 It
provided theoretical foundations for pulsed intermittent treat-
ment with higher EGFR TKI doses in GBM patients to achieve
better therapeutic outcomes, as extrachromosomal EGFRvIII DNA
levels rapidly rise during the treatment interval. Furthermore,
Nikolaev et al. created a concept called ampliﬁcation-linked
extrachromosomal mutations (ALEMs), which refers to extrachro-
mosomal mutations that originate extrachromosomally and could
be eliminated from tumor cells. ALEMs are most frequently seen in
GBM and low-grade gliomas and occur not only in EGFR but also in
PDGFRα and ERBB2, which highlights the diversity of mechanisms
by which eccDNA is involved in drug resistance to targeted
therapies in GBM.259 In addition to chemotherapy, eccDNA has
also been associated with radiotherapy resistance in GBM. Zhou
et al. investigated the function of EGFR-encoding DMs in GBM by
comparing two syngeneic primary cultures derived from a GBM
with and without cells carrying EGFR-encoding DMs. Compared to
cells without DMs, those with DMs were relatively radio-resistant,
with an elevated level of glycolytic respiration. In response to
radiation, DMs-containing cells could switch their respiration from
glycolic metabolism to oxidative phosphorylation and shift the
molecular proﬁle to that of DMs-free cells. After exposure to an
irradiated environment, cells with DMs can alter their extracellular
microenvironment not only to stimulate the invasiveness of
surrounding cells but also to build a pro-angiogenic tumor
microenvironment.260 It is suggested that DMs-containing GBM
cells may lead to tumor recurrence due to the high invasiveness
and radio-resistance.
Studies have shown that eccDNA plays a role in colon cancer
chemotherapy resistance. MTX, an antifolate chemotherapeutic
agent that inhibits DHFR, is widely used in colon cancer
treatment.261–265 DHFR is able to be ampliﬁed in the form of
Fig. 7
EccDNA in human cancers. a EccDNA and its containing genes in human cancers. In neuroblastoma, MYCN encoded by eccDNA is
associated with tumor progression. EccDNA reintegrates into chromosomes in neuroblastoma and affects chromosomal gene expression of
TERT and DCLK1. In glioblastoma, MYC, EGFR, PDGFRα, ERBB2, CDK4, and MDM2 are ampliﬁed via eccDNA. The mutation of EGFR ampliﬁed by
eccDNA is dynamically regulated to evade therapy. In colon cancer, DHFR-carrying eccDNA contributes to MTX resistance. MYC is ampliﬁed via
eccDNA. In breast cancer, HER2 is ampliﬁed via eccDNA, and PIP on eccDNA is associated with genetic instability. In cervical cancer, DHFR-
carrying eccDNA contributes to MTX resistance. In ovarian cancer, eccDNA-containing MYC and eIF-5A2 stimulates tumorigenesis. In leukemia,
MYC encoded on eccDNA contributes to tumorigenesis. In oral squamous cell carcinoma, loss of MDR1-carrying eccDNA promotes drug
sensitivity. In melanoma, focal ampliﬁcations of BRAFV600E contribute to tumorigenesis and drug resistance. b EccDNA facilitates the
oncogenesis of neuroblastoma in different ways. EccDNA serves as a template for directing the transcription of MYCN. EccDNA inhibits the
expression of DCKL1 by inserting it into its gene body. EccDNA promotes TERT expression by integrating itself into the vicinity of oncogenes
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
12
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 13 ---
DMs or HSR when cells are treated with MTX. Interestingly, in the
absence of MTX, the resistant cell lines had reduced copies of the
DHFR gene in eccDNAs, which suggested that the dynamic
regulation of eccDNAs determines the response toward che-
motherapy.53,266,267 Furthermore, Meng et al. found that the
inhibition of DNA-PKcs (a key NHEJ protein) inhibits the formation
of
DHFR-containing
eccDNAs
and
therefore
increased
MTX
sensitivity in colon cancer cells. They revealed that the depletion
of eccDNAs serves as a promising strategy in MTX-resistant
cancers.53,232
Drug resistance is the leading cause of death in cervical cancer
patients and has been a major challenge in cervical cancer
treatment.268–271 Ruiz-Herrera A et al. detected that deﬁciency in
the HR protein RAD54 resulted in a marked increase in DM-
containing subpopulations in cervical cancer cell-derived MTX-
resistant subclones. They further showed that DMs were the
predominant ampliﬁed structures observed in MTX-resistant HeLa
parental cells and that ampliﬁcation of DHFR on DMs may
contribute to MTX resistance.272
Another study showed that HU accelerates the speciﬁc loss of
extrachromosomally
ampliﬁed
drug-resistance
genes
from
vinblastine- and MTX-resistant oral squamous cell carcinoma
cells, suggesting that the elimination of eccDNA-containing
ampliﬁed drug-resistance genes contributes to improving drug
sensitivity.273
In melanoma, the BRAFV600E mutation is considered a major
oncogenic driver and can be detected in approximately half of
the advanced melanomas. Song et al. revealed that BRAFV600E
was ampliﬁed by either DMs or intrachromosomal homologous
regions in melanoma. They demonstrated that focal ampliﬁca-
tion of cells harboring BRAFV600E shows a mode switch between
DMs and HSR in response to changes in drug concentration.
Focal ampliﬁcations can combine with kinase domain duplica-
tions and alternative splicing to enhance drug resistance. In
addition, melanoma cells with BRAF-containing DMs harbor
increased resistance towards dual BRAF and MEK inhibition.130
Furthermore, cisplatin resistance of hypopharyngeal squa-
mous cell carcinoma is found to be related to eccDNA. RAB3B is
ampliﬁed on eccDNA, which promotes chemoresistance of
hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma cells by inducing
autophagy.274 Recognizing the association of focal eccDNA
ampliﬁcation patterns with drug resistance is important for
understanding cancer evolution and drug resistance, providing
therapeutic approaches to overcome plasticity.
POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS OF ECCDNA
Serving as promising biomarkers
The discovery of nuclear budding and micronucleation provides
possible pathways for eccDNA to escape from cells. Due to the
extraordinary structural stability of eccDNAs compared to linear
DNA,
they
may
be
an
ideal
source
of
potential
biomar-
kers.25,28,275,276 Several studies have demonstrated the potential
application of extrachromosomal DNA elements in body ﬂuids as
candidate biomarkers for the diagnosis and monitoring of various
diseases (Table 4).81,277,278
EccDNA may serve as a potential biomarker in cancer diagnosis
and is valuable in monitoring cancer progression (Fig. 8a). Studies
show that cancer patients with ecDNAs seem to have signiﬁcantly
lower survival rates than those without ecDNAs.279 The study by
Fan et al. found that the frequency of DMs in malignant tumors
was much higher than that in benign tumors or noncancerous
tissues,
suggesting
that
these
DMs
can
serve
as
reliable
biomarkers for tumor progression.280 Furthermore, the abundance
of DMs in peripheral blood lymphocytes has been shown to be an
independent risk factor in lung cancer patients.281
Apart from ecDNA, other types of eccDNA can also act as
biomarkers
for
precision
cancer
therapy.
Cohen
et
al.
demonstrated the potential role of spcDNA as a marker of
genomic instability. They showed high levels of spcDNA in
genetically unstable cells and tissues.92 Moreover, Schmidt et al.
showed
that
Alu
sequences
and
LINE-1
sequences
occur
frequently in tumor tissues and are dependent on the number
of spcDNAs.282 Kumar et al. detected tumor-derived human
microDNA in a mouse xenograft model of human ovarian cancer.
These microDNAs are longer in lung cancer tissue than in normal
lung tissue. Longer cell-free microDNA is enriched in preoperative
samples compared to postoperative samples.21 Unlike other
classes of eccDNA species, t-circles/c-circles are highly speciﬁc
for ALT mechanisms and can be used as promising biomarkers for
the diagnosis and management of ALT-positive tumors.283 Fogli
et al. analyzed 63 malignant gliomas and identiﬁed that c-circles
were signiﬁcantly associated with low Ki-67 immunostaining.284
EccDNA also serves as an ideal biomarker in other diseases. A
study showed that urinary cell-free eccDNAs (ucf-eccDNAs) act as
signiﬁcant biomarkers in advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Lv et al. analyzed ucf-eccDNAs from 21 patients with advanced
CKD by the Circle-Seq method and demonstrated that ucf-
eccDNAs have a distinct disease-speciﬁc proﬁle in CKD patients.285
Yang et al. performed Circle-Seq to identify eccDNAs in the fetal
growth restriction (FGR) group and the normal group. They found
that the total amount of eccDNA in the FGR group was
signiﬁcantly higher than that in the normal group and showed a
double peak length, peaking at ~146 bp and ~340 bp, respec-
tively. It provided a new vision for the screening of new
biomarkers for FGR.286 Neidlinger C et al. detected signiﬁcantly
more spcDNAs in the angioﬁbroma-derived cell cultures of
patients with tuberous sclerosis (TS) than in the skin of these
patients or in the skin of 11 healthy donors.287 Motejlek K et al.
further found that the spcDNA from angioﬁbroma cultures was
much longer than that from skin ﬁbroblast cultures. Furthermore,
the total amount of spcDNA increased with age in angioﬁbroma-
derived cultures but not in skin ﬁbroblast cultures.288
As biomarkers, there are several differences between eccDNA
and linear circulating cfDNA, and eccDNA is more advantageous in
some respects (Table 5).289,290 First, eccDNAs are resistant to
exonuclease digestion due to their closed circular structure.
Therefore, they are more stable than their linear counterparts.25,275
Second, some eccDNAs identiﬁed in the circulation, such as
microDNA, are much longer than linear DNA, facilitating detection
and dynamic monitoring.21 Third, eccDNAs have lineage speciﬁ-
city in human ovarian/prostate cancer cell lines and cell type
speciﬁcity in human ﬁbroblasts and granulocytes.11,24 Further-
more, the rolling-circle ampliﬁcation of eccDNAs can prevent site-
speciﬁc ampliﬁcation with speciﬁc primers typically used to detect
linear cfDNA, which enables the detection of genome-wide
circular cfDNA without pre-existing bias in its origin locus.21
Serving as potential therapeutic targets
Carrying complete genes, segregating randomly, and harboring
genomic plasticity make eccDNA a potential target for disease
treatment291,292 (Fig. 8b). DNA replication inhibitors (HU, gemci-
tabine, and radiation) eliminate eccDNA by integrating eccDNA
into cytoplasmic micronuclei, resulting in the silencing of multiple
oncogenes.273,293 The effectiveness of these DNA replication
inhibitors against tumor cells has been veriﬁed in various cancers,
such as neuroblastoma, colon cancer, ovarian cancer, leukemia,
and squamous cell carcinoma.47,113,153,200 However, most of these
studies have been conducted at the cellular and animal levels. A
clinical trial has investigated whether a noncytotoxic dose of HU
decreases the number of metaphase spreads containing DMs in
tumor cells in patients with ovarian carcinomas.294 More clinical
studies are needed to further investigate the effectiveness of DNA
replication inhibitors in cancer patients.
EccDNAs have been determined to play key roles in the
resistance of chemo- or radio-therapy; therefore, the elimination
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
13
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 14 ---
of
eccDNA
may
beneﬁt
a
better
outcome
together
with
conventional therapy.32,86,295–297 A large amount of laboratory
evidence has shown that tumor cells can reversibly regulate the
expression levels of key proteins by altering the amount of
eccDNA, conferring different cell phenotypes for drug resistance.
In addition, drug resistance may also be induced by creating
double-strand DNA breaks, contributing to the conversion of
eccDNA to HSR.67 Conclusively, DNA repair inhibitors that
eliminate eccDNA and inhibit double-strand DNA breaks, com-
bined with conventional therapies such as radiation, chemother-
apy, and targeted drugs, have the potential to prevent drug
resistance in cancer patients.
LIMITATIONS OF ECCDNA
Real-time monitoring of eccDNA in circulating blood has provided
a scientiﬁc basis and new insights for further investigation of the
use of these DNA elements as biomarkers for precision cancer
therapy. Although the clinical application of the detection of
circular DNA in liquid biopsies to identify tumorigenesis and
progression is attractive, several challenges remain.
First, there are signiﬁcant differences in the abundance of
eccDNA in different tissues, and the amount of eccDNA in some
diseases is not large enough to detect. The inability to provide
biopsies
of
some
tissues
limits
the
spectrum
of
clinical
applications.30
Second, improvements in eccDNA enrichment and data analysis
are needed. Currently, reliable methods to easily quantify the
abundance of circular DNA elements are lacking. As the most
commonly used method to detect eccDNAs, Circle-Seq ampliﬁes
eccDNAs by rolling circles with random primers, which may result
in a loss of a signiﬁcant amount of information related to the
abundance of speciﬁc eccDNAs.298,299 In addition, it lacks a gold
standard for eccDNA analysis. Standard analysis algorithms can
improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of eccDNA sequence
extraction. A standard analysis and control of bias are needed to
make the results more reproducible. The possibility of circulating
eccDNA being taken up by cells and the difference in distribution
between live and dead cells should be considered in the bias
analysis.21
Efﬁcient and speciﬁc removal of eccDNA is expected to be a
new method for cancer treatment in the future. However, most
methods for eliminating eccDNAs lack speciﬁcity. To date, no
technique has been used to remove targetable eccDNA. CRISPR/
Cas9 is a common gene-editing tool that uses RNA-guided
nucleases to cleave foreign genetic elements.300–307 CRISPR/Cas9
may serve as a potential method to target unique eccDNA
breakpoint
sequences,
although
it
still
lacks
experimental
evidence.300,301,308,309 The effects of CRISPR/Cas9 on the elimina-
tion of eccDNA need to be further explored. In addition, although
HU has shown its ability to eliminate eccDNAs and their contained
oncogenes, HU treatment cannot reduce the ampliﬁcation of
oncogenes on the HSR.310
CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTS
Chromosomes consisting of linear DNA and histone proteins are
the fundamental stores of genetic information in most individuals
and species. The discovery of eccDNA has shed new light on
spatial information in current genome maps. With rapid advances
in the ﬁeld of eccDNA, many publications have demonstrated that
eccDNA functions as an important regulator in intracellular
homeostasis and its abnormalities serve as a pathological trigger
for diseases. Herein, we summarized all types of eccDNA and
demonstrated their functions in multiple biological processes.
Furthermore, this review summarized the biogenesis, the biologi-
cal and pathological functions, databases, related methodology,
and the limitation of eccDNA from a historical perspective.
Collectively, we introduced the recent progress of eccDNA
publications, beneﬁting an in-depth understanding of this topic
for readers. However, some areas still remain to be addressed in
this ﬁeld.
First, what are the speciﬁc mechanisms driving the formation
and maintenance of eccDNAs? What triggers its reintegration, and
where is it reintegrated? As it is known that the stability of DNA is
related to the double-helical structure, what is the speciﬁc
topology of eccDNA? Do topoisomerase participate in the
formation and maintenance of eccDNAs? Is there a uniﬁed
theoretical framework to explain the biogenesis of eccDNAs?
Second, many studies have proposed that eccDNA plays an
important role in tumorigenesis. Elimination of eccDNAs reduces
oncogene ampliﬁcation, thereby reverting the tumor pheno-
types.12,110,311 Studies have shown that noncytotoxic strategies
that eliminate eccDNA could contribute to personalizing treat-
ment decisions in cancer patients. It is necessary to clarify the
dynamic mechanism for regulating eccDNA quantity. The origin of
eccDNAs
remains
controversial.
These
non-ecDNA
eccDNAs
appear to be selected, replicated, and propagated in the cells
and are functional regulators in the maintenance of intercellular
homeostasis. Does it actively adjust based on the environment, as
Table 4.
Summary of potential clinical applications of extrachromosomal circular DNA as a biomarker
eccDNA
Diseases
Detail information
Reference
SpcDNA
colon carcinoma, cervical cancer, ovarian adenocarcinoma,
breast adenocarcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, malignant
melanoma, osteogenic sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, tuberous
sclerosis, angioﬁbroma
spcDNA can serve as a marker of genomic
instability
20,92,282,287
MicroDNA
ovarian cancer, lung cancer, chronic kidney disease, fetal
growth restriction
microDNA is highly consistent with tumor burden
in cancer patients and is enriched in chronic
kidney disease.
21,285,286
Telomeric
circles
ALT+ osteosarcoma, B chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
malignant glioma
neuroblastoma
t-circles/c-circles are highly speciﬁc for the ALT-
positive tumors
137,284,317
ERC
/
/
/
EcDNA
adrenal carcinoma, neuroblastoma, thyroid cancer, cervical
cancer, lung cancer, fetal growth restriction
ecDNA can be exploited as reliable biomarkers
of tumor progression and is related to tumor
recurrence
280,281,286,316,318
EccDNA extrachromosomal circular DNA, SpcDNA small polydispersed DNA, ERC extrachromosomal rDNA circles, EcDNA extrachromosomal DNA, ALT
alternative lengthening of telomeres
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
14
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 15 ---
in Lamarck’s theory, or is it passively selected by the environment,
as in Darwin’s theory?312
Third, do eccDNAs interact with other biological processes?
Several studies have reported the relationships between eccDNAs
and epigenetic factors, such as the accessible chromatin land-
scape and enhancer hijacking. Other epigenetic modiﬁcation
mechanisms of eccDNA, such as DNA and histone modiﬁcations,
still require further study. Subdivision of the intracellular space
coordinates various biological processes in space and time. Phase
separation induces the formation of membrane-less compart-
ments to separate intracellular materials.313,314 Determination of
whether eccDNAs are affected by phase separation requires
further exploration and discussion.
Recent studies of eccDNA have forced a reconsideration of the
spatial information contained in the genome atlas. EccDNAs have
been shown to play speciﬁc roles in disease initiation and
progression by overriding hereditary constraints and traditional
segregation laws. We look forward to new discoveries that will
Urinary, 
amniotic fluid or others
Blood
Tissue
Identify eccDNAs
Diagnosis
Prognosis
Patient
Patient with tumor
Eliminate eccDNAs
Tumor cell with
amplified oncogenes
EccDNA eliminated 
by micronucleus 
Tumor cell with amplified 
drug-resistant genes
Eliminate eccDNAs
Loss of
drug-resistant genes
a
b
Loss of 
malignant 
phenotype
Micronucleus
Drug-resistant
Cell survival
Drug-sensitive
Cell death
Fig. 8
Clinical applications of eccDNA. The clinical value of eccDNAs in cancer. a EccDNAs can be found in patient samples, such as blood,
urine, amniotic ﬂuid, or tissue. The identiﬁcation of eccDNAs would be helpful in cancer diagnosis and prognosis. b Elimination of eccDNA
results in a loss of malignant phenotype. It can also lead to a loss of drug-resistance genes and thereby improve therapeutic effects
Table 5.
The unique characteristics of linear cfDNAs and eccDNAs as biomarkers
Classiﬁcation Structure Resistant to exonuclease
digestion
Stability
Length
Ampliﬁcation
Bias of the
origin site
linear cfDNA
Linear
Weak
Unstable Short
Ampliﬁed with speciﬁc primers
Exist
eccDNA
Circular
Strong
Stable
Long
(in some types of eccDNA,
such as microDNA)
Ampliﬁed by rolling-circle
ampliﬁcation with random primers
Avoid
EccDNA extrachromosomal circular DNA, CfDNA cell-free DNA
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
15
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 16 ---
lead to the development of a new fundamental understanding of
eccDNA and to advances in clinical diagnosis and treatment.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grants
82103240, U1932135, 81872339, 82073889, and 81802702), the Natural Science
Foundation of Shanghai (20ZR1445600), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
Funded Project (2020M681328), the Science and Technology Commission of
Shanghai (grants 20DZ2270800 and 19JC1410200), and the Innovative research
team of high-level local universities in Shanghai (SHSMU-ZDCX20210902 and
SHSMU- ZDCX20210900).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
X.F., P.C., and A.Z. provided direction and guidance throughout the preparation of
this manuscript. L.Y. and R.J. collected and interpreted the studies and was major
contributor to the writing and editing of the manuscript. P.C. and A.Z. reviewed and
made signiﬁcant revisions to the manuscript. T.G. and S.G. assisted in the revision of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Dahm, R. Discovering DNA: Friedrich Miescher and the early years of nucleic acid
research. Hum. Genet. 122, 565–581 (2008).
2. Wu, S. et al. Circular ecDNA promotes accessible chromatin and high oncogene
expression. Nature 575, 699–703 (2019).
3. Wu, S., Bafna, V., Chang, H. Y. & Mischel, P. S. Extrachromosomal DNA: an
emerging hallmark in human cancer. Annu Rev. Pathol. 17, 367–386 (2022).
4. Noer, J. B. et al. Extrachromosomal circular DNA in cancer: history, current
knowledge, and methods. Trends Genet. 38, 766–781 (2022).
5. Verhaak, R. G. W., Bafna, V. & Mischel, P. S. Extrachromosomal oncogene
ampliﬁcation in tumour pathogenesis and evolution. Nat. Rev. Cancer 19,
283–288 (2019).
6. Molin, W. T., Yaguchi, A., Blenner, M. & Saski, C. A. Autonomous replication
sequences from the Amaranthus palmeri eccDNA replicon enable replication in
yeast. BMC Res. Notes 13, 330 (2020).
7. Wang, K. et al. Deciphering extrachromosomal circular DNA in Arabidopsis.
Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 19, 1176–1183 (2021).
8. Cohen, S., Houben, A. & Segal, D. Extrachromosomal circular DNA derived from
tandemly repeated genomic sequences in plants. Plant J. 53, 1027–1034 (2008).
9. Kwolek, K. et al. Diverse and mobile: eccDNA-based identiﬁcation of carrot low-
copy-number LTR retrotransposons active in callus cultures. Plant J. 110,
1811–1828 (2022).
10. Lanciano, S. et al. Sequencing the extrachromosomal circular mobilome reveals
retrotransposon activity in plants. PLoS Genet. 13, e1006630 (2017).
11. Shoura, M. J. et al. Intricate and cell type-speciﬁc populations of endogenous
circular DNA (eccDNA) in Caenorhabditis elegans and Homo sapiens. G3 7,
3295–3303 (2017).
12. Yerlici, V. T. et al. Programmed genome rearrangements in Oxytricha produce
transcriptionally active extrachromosomal circular DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 47,
9741–9760 (2019).
13. Hull, R. M. et al. Transcription-induced formation of extrachromosomal DNA
during yeast ageing. PLoS Biol. 17, e3000471 (2019).
14. Møller, H. D. et al. Extrachromosomal circular DNA is common in yeast. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 112, E3114–E3122 (2015).
15. Cohen, S., Yacobi, K. & Segal, D. Extrachromosomal circular DNA of tandemly
repeated genomic sequences in Drosophila. Genome Res. 13, 1133–1145 (2003).
16. Cohen, S. et al. Evidence for rolling circle replication of tandem genes in Dro-
sophila. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, 4519–4526 (2005).
17. Cohen, S. & Méchali, M. Formation of extrachromosomal circles from telomeric
DNA in Xenopus laevis. EMBO Rep. 3, 1168–1174 (2002).
18. Cohen, S. & Mechali, M. A novel cell-free system reveals a mechanism of circular
DNA formation from tandem repeats. Nucleic Acids Res. 29, 2542–2548 (2001).
19. Møller, H. D. et al. Near-random distribution of chromosome-derived circular
DNA in the condensed genome of pigeons and the larger, more repeat-rich
human genome. Genome Biol. Evol. 12, 3762–3777 (2020).
20. Regev, A. et al. Telomeric repeats on small polydisperse circular DNA (spcDNA)
and genomic instability. Oncogene 17, 3455–3461 (1998).
21. Kumar, P. et al. Normal and cancerous tissues release extrachromosomal circular
DNA (eccDNA) into the circulation. Mol. Cancer Res. 15, 1197–1205 (2017).
22. Cohen, Z., Bacharach, E. & Lavi, S. Mouse major satellite DNA is prone to eccDNA
formation via DNA Ligase IV-dependent pathway. Oncogene 25, 4515–4524
(2006).
23. Paulsen, T., Kumar, P., Koseoglu, M. M. & Dutta, A. Discoveries of extra-
chromosomal circles of DNA in normal and tumor cells. Trends Genet. 34,
270–278 (2018).
24. Zhu, J., Chen, S., Zhang, F. & Wang, L. Cell-free eccDNAs: a new type of nucleic
acid component for liquid biopsy? Mol. Diagn. Ther. 22, 515–522 (2018).
25. Sin, S. T. K. et al. Identiﬁcation and characterization of extrachromosomal circular
DNA in maternal plasma. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 1658–1665 (2020).
26. Ling, X. et al. Small extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA): major functions in
evolution and cancer. Mol. Cancer 20, 113 (2021).
27. Liao, Z. et al. Classiﬁcation of extrachromosomal circular DNA with a focus on
the role of extrachromosomal DNA (ecDNA) in tumor heterogeneity and pro-
gression. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1874, 188392 (2020).
28. Wang, M. et al. Extrachromosomal circular DNAs: origin, formation and emer-
ging function in cancer. Int J. Biol. Sci. 17, 1010–1025 (2021).
29. Zuo, S. et al. Extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA): from chaos to function.
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 792555 (2021).
30. Cao, X. et al. Extrachromosomal circular DNA: category, biogenesis, recognition,
and functions. Front. Vet. Sci. 8, 693641 (2021).
31. Ambros, I. M. et al. Neuroblastoma cells can actively eliminate supernumerary
MYCN gene copies by micronucleus formation-sign of tumour cell revertance?
Eur. J. Cancer 33, 2043–2049 (1997).
32. Karami Fath, M. et al. Extra chromosomal DNA in different cancers: Individual
genome with important biological functions. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 166,
103477 (2021).
33. Hotta, Y. & Bassel, A. Molecular size and circularity of dna in cells of mammals
and higher plants. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 53, 356–362 (1965).
34. Lubs, H. A. Jr. & Salmon, J. H. The chromosomal complement of human solid
tumors. II. karyotypes of glial tumors. J. Neurosurg. 22, 160–168 (1965).
35. Cox, D., Yuncken, C. & Spriggs, A. I. Minute chromatin bodies in malignant
tumours of childhood. Lancet 1, 55–58 (1965).
36. Balaban-Malenbaum, G. & Gilbert, F. Double minute chromosomes and the
homogeneously staining regions in chromosomes of a human neuroblastoma
cell line. Science 198, 739–741 (1977).
37. Alt, F. W., Kellems, R. E., Bertino, J. R. & Schimke, R. T. Selective multiplication of
dihydrofolate reductase genes in methotrexate-resistant variants of cultured
murine cells. J. Biol. Chem. 253, 1357–1370 (1978).
38. Kaufman, R. J., Brown, P. C. & Schimke, R. T. Ampliﬁed dihydrofolate reductase
genes in unstably methotrexate-resistant cells are associated with double
minute chromosomes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 76, 5669–5673 (1979).
39. Kohl, N. E. et al. Transposition and ampliﬁcation of oncogene-related sequences
in human neuroblastomas. Cell 35, 359–367 (1983).
40. Schwab, M. et al. Ampliﬁed DNA with limited homology to myc cellular onco-
gene is shared by human neuroblastoma cell lines and a neuroblastoma
tumour. Nature 305, 245–248 (1983).
41. Von Hoff, D. D. et al. Ampliﬁed human MYC oncogenes localized to replicating
submicroscopic circular DNA molecules. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 85, 4804–4808
(1988).
42. Vogt, N. et al. Molecular structure of double-minute chromosomes bearing
ampliﬁed copies of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in gliomas. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 11368–11373 (2004).
43. Nathanson, D. A. et al. Targeted therapy resistance mediated by dynamic
regulation of extrachromosomal mutant EGFR DNA. Science 343, 72–76
(2014).
44. Qiu, G. H. et al. The decreased exclusion of nuclear eccDNA: From molecular and
subcellular levels to human aging and age-related diseases. Ageing Res. Rev. 67,
101306 (2021).
45. Turner, K. M. et al. Extrachromosomal oncogene ampliﬁcation drives tumour
evolution and genetic heterogeneity. Nature 543, 122–125 (2017).
46. Kim, H. et al. Extrachromosomal DNA is associated with oncogene ampliﬁcation
and poor outcome across multiple cancers. Nat. Genet. 52, 891–897 (2020).
47. Deshpande, V. et al. Exploring the landscape of focal ampliﬁcations in cancer
using AmpliconArchitect. Nat. Commun. 10, 392 (2019).
48. Lee, Y. & Lee, H. Integrative reconstruction of cancer genome karyotypes using
InfoGenomeR. Nat. Commun. 12, 2467 (2021).
49. Kumar, P. et al. ATAC-seq identiﬁes thousands of extrachromosomal circular
DNA in cancer and cell lines. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba2489 (2020).
50. Møller, H. D. et al. Circular DNA elements of chromosomal origin are common in
healthy human somatic tissue. Nat. Commun. 9, 1069 (2018).
51. Mehta, D. et al. Full-length sequencing of circular DNA viruses and extra-
chromosomal circular DNA using CIDER-Seq. Nat. Protoc. 15, 1673–1689 (2020).
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
16
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 17 ---
52. Ceccaldi, R., Rondinelli, B. & D’Andrea, A. D. Repair pathway choices and con-
sequences at the double-strand break. Trends Cell Biol. 26, 52–64 (2016).
53. Meng, X. et al. Novel role for non-homologous end joining in the formation of
double minutes in methotrexate-resistant colon cancer cells. J. Med. Genet. 52,
135–144 (2015).
54. Tseng, H. M. & Tomkinson, A. E. A physical and functional interaction between
yeast Pol4 and Dnl4-Lif1 links DNA synthesis and ligation in nonhomologous
end joining. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 45630–45637 (2002).
55. Dillon, L. W. et al. Production of extrachromosomal microDNAs is linked to
mismatch repair pathways and transcriptional activity. Cell Rep. 11, 1749–1759
(2015).
56. Hull, R. M. & Houseley, J. The adaptive potential of circular DNA accumulation in
ageing cells. Curr. Genet. 66, 889–894 (2020).
57. van Leen, E., Brückner, L. & Henssen, A. G. The genomic and spatial mobility of
extrachromosomal DNA and its implications for cancer therapy. Nat. Genet. 54,
107–114 (2022).
58. McClintock, B. The production of homozygous deﬁcient tissues with mutant
characteristics by means of the aberrant mitotic behavior of ring-shaped
chromosomes. Genetics 23, 315–376 (1938).
59. McClintock, B. The stability of broken ends of chromosomes in Zea Mays.
Genetics 26, 234–282 (1941).
60. Ly, P. & Cleveland, D. W. Rebuilding chromosomes after catastrophe: emerging
mechanisms of chromothripsis. Trends Cell Biol. 27, 917–930 (2017).
61. Guérin, T. M. & Marcand, S. Breakage in breakage-fusion-bridge cycle: an 80-
year-old mystery. Trends Genet. 38, 641–645 (2022).
62. Murnane, J. P. & Sabatier, L. Chromosome rearrangements resulting from telo-
mere dysfunction and their role in cancer. Bioessays 26, 1164–1174 (2004).
63. Henriksen, R. A. et al. Circular DNA in the human germline and its association
with recombination. Mol. Cell 82, 209–217.e207 (2022).
64. Korbel, J. O. & Campbell, P. J. Criteria for inference of chromothripsis in cancer
genomes. Cell 152, 1226–1236 (2013).
65. Stephens, P. J. et al. Massive genomic rearrangement acquired in a single cat-
astrophic event during cancer development. Cell 144, 27–40 (2011).
66. Rausch, T. et al. Genome sequencing of pediatric medulloblastoma links cata-
strophic DNA rearrangements with TP53 mutations. Cell 148, 59–71 (2012).
67. Shoshani, O. et al. Chromothripsis drives the evolution of gene ampliﬁcation in
cancer. Nature 591, 137–141 (2021).
68. Vogt, N. et al. Amplicon rearrangements during the extrachromosomal and
intrachromosomal ampliﬁcation process in a glioma. Nucleic Acids Res. 42,
13194–13205 (2014).
69. Cheng, C. et al. Whole-genome sequencing reveals diverse models of structural
variations in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 98,
256–274 (2016).
70. Mehanna, P. et al. Characterization of the microDNA through the response to
chemotherapeutics in lymphoblastoid cell lines. PLoS ONE 12, e0184365 (2017).
71. Sunnerhagen, P. et al. Molecular cloning and characterization of small polydisperse
circular DNA from mouse 3T6 cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 14, 7823–7838 (1986).
72. Röijer, E. et al. Translocation, deletion/ampliﬁcation, and expression of HMGIC
and MDM2 in a carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma. Am. J. Pathol. 160,
433–440 (2002).
73. Storlazzi, C. T. et al. Gene ampliﬁcation as double minutes or homogeneously
staining regions in solid tumors: origin and structure. Genome Res. 20,
1198–1206 (2010).
74. Mansisidor, A. et al. Genomic copy-number loss is rescued by self-limiting
production of DNA circles. Mol. Cell 72, 583–593.e584 (2018).
75. Bahr, G., Gilbert, F., Balaban, G. & Engler, W. Homogeneously staining regions
and double minutes in a human cell line: chromatin organization and DNA
content. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 71, 657–661 (1983).
76. Rattner, J. B. & Lin, C. C. Ultrastructural organization of double minute chro-
mosomes and HSR regions in human colon carcinoma cells. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 38, 176–181 (1984).
77. Hamkalo, B. A., Farnham, P. J., Johnston, R. & Schimke, R. T. Ultrastructural
features of minute chromosomes in a methotrexate-resistant mouse 3T3 cell
line. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 82, 1126–1130 (1985).
78. Rajkumar, U. et al. EcSeg: semantic segmentation of metaphase images con-
taining extrachromosomal DNA. iScience 21, 428–435 (2019).
79. Brettmann, E. A., Oh, I. Y. & de Guzman Strong, C. High-throughput identiﬁcation
of gene regulatory sequences using next-generation sequencing of circular
chromosome conformation capture (4C-seq). J. Vis. Exp. 140, 58030 (2018).
80. Schneider, S. S. et al. Isolation and structural analysis of a 1.2-megabase N-myc
amplicon from a human neuroblastoma. Mol. Cell Biol. 12, 5563–5570 (1992).
81. Sin, S. T. K. et al. Characteristics of fetal extrachromosomal circular DNA in
maternal plasma: methylation status and clearance. Clin. Chem. 67, 788–796
(2021).
82. Shibata, Y. et al. Extrachromosomal microDNAs and chromosomal microdele-
tions in normal tissues. Science 336, 82–86 (2012).
83. Zhu, Y. et al. Oncogenic extrachromosomal DNA functions as mobile enhancers
to globally amplify chromosomal transcription. Cancer Cell 39, 694–707.e697
(2021).
84. Oobatake, Y. & Shimizu, N. Double-strand breakage in the extrachromosomal
double minutes triggers their aggregation in the nucleus, micronucleation, and
morphological transformation. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 59, 133–143 (2020).
85. Shimizu, N., Hashizume, T., Shingaki, K. & Kawamoto, J. K. Ampliﬁcation of
plasmids containing a mammalian replication initiation region is mediated by
controllable conﬂict between replication and transcription. Cancer Res. 63,
5281–5290 (2003).
86. Shimizu, N. Extrachromosomal double minutes and chromosomal homo-
geneously staining regions as probes for chromosome research. Cytogenet.
Genome Res. 124, 312–326 (2009).
87. Shimizu, N., Itoh, N., Utiyama, H. & Wahl, G. M. Selective entrapment of extra-
chromosomally ampliﬁed DNA by nuclear budding and micronucleation during
S phase. J. Cell Biol. 140, 1307–1320 (1998).
88. Koche, R. P. et al. Extrachromosomal circular DNA drives oncogenic genome
remodeling in neuroblastoma. Nat. Genet. 52, 29–34 (2020).
89. Haber, D. A. & Schimke, R. T. Unstable ampliﬁcation of an altered dihydrofolate
reductase gene associated with double-minute chromosomes. Cell 26, 355–362
(1981).
90. Kaufman, R. J., Brown, P. C. & Schimke, R. T. Loss and stabilization of ampliﬁed
dihydrofolate reductase genes in mouse sarcoma S-180 cell lines. Mol. Cell Biol.
1, 1084–1093 (1981).
91. Beverley, S. M., Coderre, J. A., Santi, D. V. & Schimke, R. T. Unstable DNA
ampliﬁcations
in
methotrexate-resistant
Leishmania
consist
of
extra-
chromosomal circles which relocalize during stabilization. Cell 38, 431–439
(1984).
92. Cohen, S., Regev, A. & Lavi, S. Small polydispersed circular DNA (spcDNA) in
human cells: association with genomic instability. Oncogene 14, 977–985 (1997).
93. Smith, C. & Vinograd, J. Small polydisperse circular DNA of HeLa cells. J. Mol. Biol.
69, 163–178 (1972).
94. Krolewski, J. J., Schindler, C. W. & Rush, M. G. Structure of extrachromosomal
circular DNAs containing both the Alu family of dispersed repetitive sequences
and other regions of chromosomal DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 174, 41–54 (1984).
95. Krolewski, J. J., Bertelsen, A. H., Humayun, M. Z. & Rush, M. G. Members of the Alu
family of interspersed, repetitive DNA sequences are in the small circular DNA
population of monkey cells grown in culture. J. Mol. Biol. 154, 399–415 (1982).
96. Kunisada, T. & Yamagishi, H. Sequence organization of repetitive sequences
enriched in small polydisperse circular DNAs from HeLa cells. J. Mol. Biol. 198,
557–565 (1987).
97. Cohen, S. & Lavi, S. Induction of circles of heterogeneous sizes in carcinogen-
treated cells: two-dimensional gel analysis of circular DNA molecules. Mol. Cell
Biol. 16, 2002–2014 (1996).
98. Paulsen, T. et al. Small extrachromosomal circular DNAs, microDNA, produce
short regulatory RNAs that suppress gene expression independent of canonical
promoters. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, 4586–4596 (2019).
99. Paulsen, T. et al. MicroDNA levels are dependent on MMEJ, repressed by c-NHEJ
pathway, and stimulated by DNA damage. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, 11787–11799
(2021).
100. Pickett, H. A. et al. Normal mammalian cells negatively regulate telomere length
by telomere trimming. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20, 4684–4692 (2011).
101. Rivera, T., Haggblom, C., Cosconati, S. & Karlseder, J. A balance between elon-
gation and trimming regulates telomere stability in stem cells. Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 24, 30–39 (2017).
102. Cesare, A. J. et al. Telomere loops and homologous recombination-dependent
telomeric circles in a Kluyveromyces lactis telomere mutant strain. Mol. Cell Biol.
28, 20–29 (2008).
103. Min, J., Wright, W. E. & Shay, J. W. Clustered telomeres in phase-separated
nuclear condensates engage mitotic DNA synthesis through BLM and RAD52.
Genes Dev. 33, 814–827 (2019).
104. Brosnan-Cashman, J. A. et al. ATRX loss induces multiple hallmarks of the
alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) phenotype in human glioma cell
lines in a cell line-speciﬁc manner. PLoS ONE 13, e0204159 (2018).
105. Compton, S. A. et al. Xrcc3 and Nbs1 are required for the production of extra-
chromosomal telomeric circles in human alternative lengthening of telomere
cells. Cancer Res. 67, 1513–1519 (2007).
106. Li, B., Reddy, S. & Comai, L. Depletion of Ku70/80 reduces the levels of extra-
chromosomal telomeric circles and inhibits proliferation of ALT cells. Aging 3,
395–406 (2011).
107. Sinclair, D. A. & Guarente, L. Extrachromosomal rDNA circles-a cause of aging in
yeast. Cell 91, 1033–1042 (1997).
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
17
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 18 ---
108. Heo, S. J. et al. Bloom’s syndrome gene suppresses premature ageing caused by
Sgs1 deﬁciency in yeast. Genes Cells 4, 619–625 (1999).
109. Neurohr, G. E. et al. Deregulation of the G1/S-phase transition is the proximal
cause of mortality in old yeast mother cells. Genes Dev. 32, 1075–1084 (2018).
110. Benner, S. E., Wahl, G. M. & Von Hoff, D. D. Double minute chromosomes and
homogeneously staining regions in tumors taken directly from patients versus
in human tumor cell lines. Anticancer Drugs 2, 11–25 (1991).
111. Mark, J. & Granberg, I. The chromosomal aberration of double-minutes in three
gliomas. Acta Neuropathol. 16, 194–204 (1970).
112. Olinici, C. D. Double minute chromatin bodies in a case of ovarian ascitic car-
cinoma. Br. J. Cancer 25, 350–353 (1971).
113. Sanborn, J. Z. et al. Double minute chromosomes in glioblastoma multiforme
are revealed by precise reconstruction of oncogenic amplicons. Cancer Res. 73,
6036–6045 (2013).
114. L’Abbate, A. et al. Genomic organization and evolution of double minutes/
homogeneously staining regions with MYC ampliﬁcation in human cancer.
Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 9131–9145 (2014).
115. Xu, K. et al. Structure and evolution of double minutes in diagnosis and relapse
brain tumors. Acta Neuropathol. 137, 123–137 (2019).
116. Matsui, A. et al. Gene ampliﬁcation: mechanisms and involvement in cancer.
Biomol. Concepts 4, 567–582 (2013).
117. Zhu, Y., Gong, L. & Wei, C. L. Guilt by association: EcDNA as a mobile transac-
tivator in cancer. Trends Cancer 8, 747–758 (2022).
118. Shimizu, N. Gene ampliﬁcation and the extrachromosomal circular DNA. Genes
12, 1533 (2021).
119. Gresham, D. et al. Adaptation to diverse nitrogen-limited environments by
deletion or extrachromosomal element formation of the GAP1 locus. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 18551–18556 (2010).
120. Ermakov, A. V. et al. Oxidized extracellular DNA as a stress signal in human cells.
Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2013, 649747 (2013).
121. Ermakov, A. V., Kon’kova, M. S., Kostiuk, S. V. & Veĭko, N. N. [DNA-signaling
pathway mediating development of a radiation-induced bystander effect in
human cells]. Radiats Biol. Radioecol. 51, 651–659 (2011).
122. Ermakov, A. V. et al. Oxidative stress as a signiﬁcant factor for development of an
adaptive response in irradiated and nonirradiated human lymphocytes after
inducing the bystander effect by low-dose X-radiation. Mutat. Res. 669, 155–161
(2009).
123. Ermakov, A. V. et al. [The DNA fragments obtained from the culture media
exposed to adaptive doses of the ionizing radiation as factors of stress signaling
between lymphocytes and bystander cells]. Radiats Biol. Radioecol. 47, 133–140
(2007).
124. Kostiuk, S. V. et al. The changing of cell-free DNA properties of peripheral blood
and TCR-mutant cell frequency in individuals exposed to ionizing radiation.
Radiats Biol. Radioecol. 48, 5–13 (2008).
125. Ermakov, A. V. et al. [Bystander effect development in human mesenchymal
stem cells after exposure to adaptive dose of X-radiation]. Radiats Biol. Radio-
ecol. 50, 42–51 (2010).
126. Sergeeva, V. A. et al. Low-dose ionizing radiation affects mesenchymal stem
cells via extracellular oxidized cell-free DNA: a possible mediator of bystander
effect and adaptive response. Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2017, 9515809 (2017).
127. Kostyuk, S. V. et al. Role of extracellular DNA oxidative modiﬁcation in radiation
induced bystander effects in human endotheliocytes. Mutat. Res. 729, 52–60
(2012).
128. Zhao, X. et al. CircleBase: an integrated resource and analysis platform for
human eccDNAs. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D72–D82 (2022).
129. Xia, W. & Jie, W. ZEB1-AS1/miR-133a-3p/LPAR3/EGFR axis promotes the pro-
gression of thyroid cancer by regulating PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Cancer Cell
Int. 20, 94–94 (2020).
130. Song, K. et al. Plasticity of extrachromosomal and intrachromosomal BRAF
ampliﬁcations in overcoming targeted therapy dosage challenges. Cancer Disco.
12, 1046–1069 (2022).
131. Sun, W. et al. Constitutive ERK1/2 activation contributes to production of double
minute chromosomes in tumour cells. J. Pathol. 235, 14–24 (2015).
132. Tomaska, L., Nosek, J., Kramara, J. & Grifﬁth, J. D. Telomeric circles: universal
players in telomere maintenance? Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 1010–1015 (2009).
133. Xu, J. & McEachern, M. J. Maintenance of very long telomeres by recombination
in the Kluyveromyces lactis stn1-M1 mutant involves extreme telomeric turn-
over, telomeric circles, and concerted telomeric ampliﬁcation. Mol. Cell Biol. 32,
2992–3008 (2012).
134. Yu, E. Y., Pérez-Martín, J., Holloman, W. K. & Lue, N. F. Mre11 and Blm-dependent
formation of ALT-like telomeres in Ku-deﬁcient ustilago maydis. PLoS Genet. 11,
e1005570 (2015).
135. Pickett, H. A. et al. Control of telomere length by a trimming mechanism that
involves generation of t-circles. Embo j. 28, 799–809 (2009).
136. Cesare, A. J. & Grifﬁth, J. D. Telomeric DNA in ALT cells is characterized by free
telomeric circles and heterogeneous t-loops. Mol. Cell Biol. 24, 9948–9957
(2004).
137. Yu, E. Y. et al. Telomere trimming and DNA damage as signatures of high risk
neuroblastoma. Neoplasia 21, 689–701 (2019).
138. Dagg, R. A. et al. Extensive proliferation of human cancer cells with ever-shorter
telomeres. Cell Rep. 19, 2544–2556 (2017).
139. van Steensel, B. & de Lange, T. Control of telomere length by the human
telomeric protein TRF1. Nature 385, 740–743 (1997).
140. Yeager, T. R. et al. Telomerase-negative immortalized human cells contain a
novel type of promyelocytic leukemia (PML) body. Cancer Res. 59, 4175–4179
(1999).
141. Oganesian, L. & Karlseder, J. Mammalian 5’ C-rich telomeric overhangs are a
mark of recombination-dependent telomere maintenance. Mol. Cell 42, 224–236
(2011).
142. Plantinga, M. J. et al. Telomerase suppresses formation of ALT-associated single-
stranded telomeric C-circles. Mol. Cancer Res. 11, 557–567 (2013).
143. Norris, D. & Osley, M. A. The two gene pairs encoding H2A and H2B play
different roles in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae life cycle. Mol. Cell Biol. 7,
3473–3481 (1987).
144. Libuda, D. E. & Winston, F. Ampliﬁcation of histone genes by circular chromo-
some formation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 443, 1003–1007 (2006).
145. Peng, H., Mirouze, M. & Bucher, E. Extrachromosomal circular DNA: a neglected
nucleic acid molecule in plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 69, 102263 (2022).
146. Guan, X. Y. et al. Isolation of a novel candidate oncogene within a frequently
ampliﬁed region at 3q26 in ovarian cancer. Cancer Res. 61, 3806–3809 (2001).
147. Von Hoff, D. D. et al. Elimination of extrachromosomally ampliﬁed MYC genes
from human tumor cells reduces their tumorigenicity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
89, 8165–8169 (1992).
148. Durkin, K. et al. Serial translocation by means of circular intermediates underlies
colour sidedness in cattle. Nature 482, 81–84 (2012).
149. Koo, D. H. et al. Extrachromosomal circular DNA-based ampliﬁcation and
transmission of herbicide resistance in crop weed Amaranthus palmeri. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 3332–3337 (2018).
150. Molin, W. T., Yaguchi, A., Blenner, M. & Saski, C. A. The EccDNA replicon: a
heritable, extranuclear vehicle that enables gene ampliﬁcation and glyphosate
resistance in Amaranthus palmeri. Plant Cell 32, 2132–2140 (2020).
151. Speranskii, A. I., Kostyuk, S. V., Kalashnikova, E. A. & Veiko, N. N. Enrichment of
extracellular DNA from the cultivation medium of human peripheral blood
mononuclears with genomic CpG rich fragments results in increased cell pro-
duction of IL-6 and TNF-a via activation of the NF-kB signaling pathway. Biomed.
Khim. 62, 331–340 (2016).
152. Kostjuk, S. et al. Extracellular GC-rich DNA activates TLR9- and NF-kB-dependent
signaling pathways in human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(haMSCs). Expert Opin. Biol. Ther. 12, S99–S111 (2012).
153. Valent, A. et al. In vivo elimination of acentric double minutes containing
ampliﬁed MYCN from neuroblastoma tumor cells through the formation of
micronuclei. Am. J. Pathol. 158, 1579–1584 (2001).
154. Shimizu, N., Misaka, N. & Utani, K. Nonselective DNA damage induced by a
replication inhibitor results in the selective elimination of extrachromosomal
double minutes from human cancer cells. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 46,
865–874 (2007).
155. Mackenzie, K. J. et al. cGAS surveillance of micronuclei links genome instability
to innate immunity. Nature 548, 461–465 (2017).
156. de Oliveira Mann, C. C. & Kranzusch, P. J. cGAS conducts micronuclei DNA
surveillance. Trends Cell Biol. 27, 697–698 (2017).
157. Wang, Y. et al. eccDNAs are apoptotic products with high innate immunosti-
mulatory activity. Nature 599, 308–314 (2021).
158. Wu, T. et al. Extrachromosomal DNA formation enables tumor immune escape
potentially through regulating antigen presentation gene expression. Sci. Rep.
12, 3590 (2022).
159. Cohen, S., Menut, S. & Méchali, M. Regulated formation of extrachromosomal
circular DNA molecules during development in Xenopus laevis. Mol. Cell Biol. 19,
6682–6689 (1999).
160. Kunisada, T. et al. Appearance of extrachromosomal circular DNAs during in vivo
and in vitro ageing of mammalian cells. Mech. Ageing Dev. 29, 89–99 (1985).
161. Denoth-Lippuner, A., Krzyzanowski, M. K., Stober, C. & Barral, Y. Role of SAGA in
the asymmetric segregation of DNA circles during yeast ageing. Elife. 3, e03790
(2014).
162. Kaeberlein, M., McVey, M. & Guarente, L. The SIR2/3/4 complex and SIR2 alone
promote longevity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by two different mechanisms.
Genes Dev. 13, 2570–2580 (1999).
163. Defossez, P. A. et al. Elimination of replication block protein Fob1 extends the
life span of yeast mother cells. Mol. Cell 3, 447–455 (1999).
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
18
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 19 ---
164. Shcheprova, Z. et al. A mechanism for asymmetric segregation of age during
yeast budding. Nature 454, 728–734 (2008).
165. Luebeck, J. et al. AmpliconReconstructor integrates NGS and optical mapping to
resolve the complex structures of focal ampliﬁcations. Nat. Commun. 11, 4374
(2020).
166. Helmsauer, K. et al. Enhancer hijacking determines extrachromosomal circular
MYCN amplicon architecture in neuroblastoma. Nat. Commun. 11, 5823 (2020).
167. deCarvalho, A. C. et al. Discordant inheritance of chromosomal and extra-
chromosomal DNA elements contributes to dynamic disease evolution in glio-
blastoma. Nat. Genet. 50, 708–717 (2018).
168. Pyne, A. L. B. et al. Base-pair resolution analysis of the effect of supercoiling on
DNA ﬂexibility and major groove recognition by triplex-forming oligonucleo-
tides. Nat. Commun. 12, 1053 (2021).
169. Yi, E. et al. Live-cell imaging shows uneven segregation of extrachromosomal
DNA elements and transcriptionally active extrachromosomal DNA Hubs in
cancer. Cancer Disco. 12, 468–483 (2022).
170. Peng, L. et al. eccDNAdb: a database of extrachromosomal circular DNA proﬁles
in human cancers. Oncogene 41, 2696–2705 (2022).
171. Robert, M. & Crasta, K. Breaking the vicious circle: extrachromosomal circular
DNA as an emerging player in tumour evolution. Semin Cell Dev. Biol. 123,
140–150 (2022).
172. Wu, S., Bafna, V. & Mischel, P. S. Extrachromosomal DNA (ecDNA) in cancer
pathogenesis. Curr. Opin. Genet Dev. 66, 78–82 (2021).
173. Bailey, C., Shoura, M. J., Mischel, P. S. & Swanton, C. Extrachromosomal DNA-
relieving heredity constraints, accelerating tumour evolution. Ann. Oncol. 31,
884–893 (2020).
174. Pellman, D. & Zhang, C. Z. Decoding complex patterns of oncogene ampliﬁca-
tion. Nat. Genet. 53, 1626–1627 (2021).
175. Tanaka, H. & Watanabe, T. Mechanisms underlying recurrent genomic ampliﬁ-
cation in human cancers. Trends Cancer 6, 462–477 (2020).
176. Albertson, D. G. Gene ampliﬁcation in cancer. Trends Genet. 22, 447–455 (2006).
177. Wolpaw, A. J. & Dang, C. V. MYC-induced metabolic stress and tumorigenesis.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1870, 43–50 (2018).
178. Anderson, M. W., Reynolds, S. H., You, M. & Maronpot, R. M. Role of proto-
oncogene activation in carcinogenesis. Environ. Health Perspect. 98, 13–24
(1992).
179. Croce, C. M. Oncogenes and cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 358, 502–511 (2008).
180. Albihn, A., Johnsen, J. I. & Henriksson, M. A. MYC in oncogenesis and as a target
for cancer therapies. Adv. Cancer Res. 107, 163–224 (2010).
181. Liu, Z. et al. Mutations in the RNA splicing factor SF3B1 promote tumorigenesis
through MYC stabilization. Cancer Disco. 10, 806–821 (2020).
182. Liu, Y. et al. MYC dysfunction modulates stemness and tumorigenesis in breast
cancer. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 17, 178–187 (2021).
183. Caforio, M. et al. Recent advances in searching c-Myc transcriptional cofactors
during tumorigenesis. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 37, 239 (2018).
184. Levayer, R., Hauert, B. & Moreno, E. Cell mixing induced by myc is required for
competitive tissue invasion and destruction. Nature 524, 476–480 (2015).
185. Thompson, C. B., Challoner, P. B., Neiman, P. E. & Groudine, M. Levels of c-myc
oncogene mRNA are invariant throughout the cell cycle. Nature 314, 363–366
(1985).
186. Bechade, C. et al. Induction of proliferation or transformation of neuroretina
cells by the mil and myc viral oncogenes. Nature 316, 559–562 (1985).
187. Baluapuri, A., Wolf, E. & Eilers, M. Target gene-independent functions of MYC
oncoproteins. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 255–267 (2020).
188. Little, C. D. et al. Ampliﬁcation and expression of the c-myc oncogene in human
lung cancer cell lines. Nature 306, 194–196 (1983).
189. Lin, C. Y. et al. Transcriptional ampliﬁcation in tumor cells with elevated c-Myc.
Cell 151, 56–67 (2012).
190. Stine, Z. E. et al. MYC, metabolism, and cancer. Cancer Disco. 5, 1024–1039
(2015).
191. Tu, R. et al. Crosstalk between oncogenic MYC and noncoding RNAs in cancer.
Semin. Cancer Biol. 75, 62–71 (2021).
192. Herrick, J. et al. Genomic organization of ampliﬁed MYC genes suggests distinct
mechanisms of ampliﬁcation in tumorigenesis. Cancer Res. 65, 1174–1179
(2005).
193. Meitar, D., Crawford, S. E., Rademaker, A. W. & Cohn, S. L. Tumor angiogenesis
correlates with metastatic disease, N-myc ampliﬁcation, and poor outcome in
human neuroblastoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 14, 405–414 (1996).
194. Rubie, H. et al. N-Myc gene ampliﬁcation is a major prognostic factor in localized
neuroblastoma: results of the French NBL 90 study. Neuroblastoma Study Group
of the Société Francaise d’Oncologie Pédiatrique. J. Clin. Oncol. 15, 1171–1182
(1997).
195. Bordow, S. B. et al. Prognostic signiﬁcance of MYCN oncogene expression in
childhood neuroblastoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 16, 3286–3294 (1998).
196. Lam, W. A. et al. Extracellular matrix rigidity modulates neuroblastoma cell
differentiation and N-myc expression. Mol. Cancer 9, 35 (2010).
197. Hwang, W. L. et al. Clinical impact of tumor mutational burden in neuro-
blastoma. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 111, 695–699 (2019).
198. Theissen, J. et al. Heterogeneity of the MYCN oncogene in neuroblastoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 15, 2085–2090 (2009).
199. Karami Fath, M. et al. Revisiting characteristics of oncogenic extrachromosomal
DNA as mobile enhancers on neuroblastoma and glioma cancers. Cancer Cell Int.
22, 200 (2022).
200. Huh, Y. O. et al. Double minute chromosomes in acute myeloid leukemia,
myelodysplastic syndromes, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia are asso-
ciated with micronuclei, MYC or MLL ampliﬁcation, and complex karyotype.
Cancer Genet. 209, 313–320 (2016).
201. Koduru, P. et al. Cytogenomic characterization of double minute heterogeneity
in therapy related acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Genet. 238, 69–75 (2019).
202. Wang, H. Y. et al. JAK2 double minutes with resultant simultaneous ampliﬁca-
tion of JAK2 and CD274 in a therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome evolving
into an acute myeloid leukaemia. Br. J. Haematol. 185, 566–570 (2019).
203. A, L. A. et al. MYC-containing amplicons in acute myeloid leukemia: genomic
structures,
evolution,
and
transcriptional
consequences.
Leukemia
32,
2152–2166 (2018).
204. Bruckert, P. et al. Double minutes and c-MYC ampliﬁcation in acute myelo-
genous leukemia: are they prognostic factors? Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 120,
73–79 (2000).
205. Hung, K. L. et al. ecDNA hubs drive cooperative intermolecular oncogene
expression. Nature 600, 731–736 (2021).
206. Harjes, U. EGFR is going circular. Nat. Rev. Cancer 21, 280 (2021).
207. Zhang, X. et al. An allosteric mechanism for activation of the kinase domain of
epidermal growth factor receptor. Cell 125, 1137–1149 (2006).
208. Meador, C. B., Sequist, L. V. & Piotrowska, Z. Targeting EGFR Exon 20 insertions in
non-small cell lung cancer: recent advances and clinical updates. Cancer Disco.
11, 2145–2157 (2021).
209. Tan, C. S. et al. Third generation EGFR TKIs: current data and future directions.
Mol. Cancer 17, 29 (2018).
210. EGFR mutations in GBM alter ligand binding and subsequent dimerization.
Cancer Discov. 12, 884 (2022).
211. Castellanos, E., Feld, E. & Horn, L. Driven by mutations: the predictive value of
mutation subtype in EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer. J. Thorac. Oncol.
12, 612–623 (2017).
212. Guardiola, S., Varese, M., Sánchez-Navarro, M. & Giralt, E. A third shot at EGFR:
new opportunities in cancer therapy. Trends Pharm. Sci. 40, 941–955 (2019).
213. Qian, W. et al. The EGFR-HSF1 axis accelerates the tumorigenesis of pancreatic
cancer. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 40, 25 (2021).
214. Liu, Y. et al. Rolling-translated EGFR variants sustain EGFR signaling and promote
glioblastoma tumorigenicity. Neuro Oncol. 23, 743–756 (2021).
215. Zack, T. I. et al. Pan-cancer patterns of somatic copy number alteration. Nat.
Genet. 45, 1134–1140 (2013).
216. Beroukhim, R. et al. The landscape of somatic copy-number alteration across
human cancers. Nature 463, 899–905 (2010).
217. Gan, H. K., Kaye, A. H. & Luwor, R. B. The EGFRvIII variant in glioblastoma mul-
tiforme. J. Clin. Neurosci. 16, 748–754 (2009).
218. Hu, C. et al. Glioblastoma mutations alter EGFR dimer structure to prevent ligand
bias. Nature 602, 518–522 (2022).
219. Shen, J. et al. Lycorine inhibits glioblastoma multiforme growth through EGFR
suppression. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 37, 157 (2018).
220. Gao, X. et al. Circular RNA-encoded oncogenic E-cadherin variant promotes
glioblastoma tumorigenicity through activation of EGFR-STAT3 signalling. Nat.
Cell Biol. 23, 278–291 (2021).
221. Oh, D. Y. & Bang, Y. J. HER2-targeted therapies - a role beyond breast cancer.
Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 17, 33–48 (2020).
222. Ruiz-Saenz, A. et al. HER2 ampliﬁcation in tumors activates PI3K/Akt signaling
independent of HER3. Cancer Res. 78, 3645–3658 (2018).
223. Moasser, M. M. The oncogene HER2: its signaling and transforming functions
and its role in human cancer pathogenesis. Oncogene 26, 6469–6487 (2007).
224. Li, B. T. et al. HER2 ampliﬁcation and HER2 mutation are distinct molecular
targets in lung cancers. J. Thorac. Oncol. 11, 414–419 (2016).
225. Kanayama, K. et al. Association of HER2 gene ampliﬁcation and tumor pro-
gression in early gastric cancer. Virchows Arch. 473, 559–565 (2018).
226. Harbeck, N. & Gnant, M. Breast cancer. Lancet 389, 1134–1150 (2017).
227. Waks, A. G. & Winer, E. P. Breast cancer treatment. JAMA 321, 316 (2019).
228. Yeo, S. K. & Guan, J. L. Breast cancer: multiple subtypes within a tumor? Trends
Cancer 3, 753–760 (2017).
229. Bange, J., Zwick, E. & Ullrich, A. Molecular targets for breast cancer therapy and
prevention. Nat. Med. 7, 548–552 (2001).
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
19
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 20 ---
230. Tolmachev, V., Orlova, A. & Sörensen, J. The emerging role of radionuclide
molecular imaging of HER2 expression in breast cancer. Semin. Cancer Biol. 72,
185–197 (2021).
231. Bardia, A. & Hurvitz, S. Targeted therapy for premenopausal women with HR(+),
HER2(-) advanced breast cancer: focus on special considerations and latest
advances. Clin. Cancer Res. 24, 5206–5218 (2018).
232. Vicario, R. et al. Patterns of HER2 gene ampliﬁcation and response to anti-HER2
therapies. PLoS ONE 10, e0129876 (2015).
233. Tang, D. J. et al. Overexpression of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A2 enhances cell
motility and promotes tumor metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatol-
ogy 51, 1255–1263 (2010).
234. He, L. R. et al. Overexpression of eIF5A-2 is an adverse prognostic marker of
survival in stage I non-small cell lung cancer patients. Int J. Cancer 129, 143–150
(2011).
235. Yang, G. F. et al. Expression and ampliﬁcation of eIF-5A2 in human epithelial
ovarian tumors and overexpression of EIF-5A2 is a new independent predictor
of outcome in patients with ovarian carcinoma. Gynecol. Oncol. 112, 314–318
(2009).
236. Xie, D. et al. Overexpression of EIF-5A2 is associated with metastasis of human
colorectal carcinoma. Hum. Pathol. 39, 80–86 (2008).
237. Tome, M. E., Fiser, S. M., Payne, C. M. & Gerner, E. W. Excess putrescine accu-
mulation inhibits the formation of modiﬁed eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (eIF-
5A) and induces apoptosis. Biochem J. 328(Pt 3), 847–854 (1997).
238. Jenkins, Z. A., Hååg, P. G. & Johansson, H. E. Human eIF5A2 on chromosome
3q25-q27 is a phylogenetically conserved vertebrate variant of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 5A with tissue-speciﬁc expression. Genomics 71,
101–109 (2001).
239. Shiras, A. & Mondal, A. Extrachromosomal DNA: redeﬁning the pathogenesis of
glioblastoma. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1876, 188551 (2021).
240. Morton, A. R. et al. Functional enhancers shape extrachromosomal oncogene
ampliﬁcations. Cell 179, 1330–1341.e1313 (2019).
241. Jin, Y. et al. Novel functional MAR elements of double minute chromosomes in
human ovarian cells capable of enhancing gene expression. PLoS ONE 7, e30419
(2012).
242. Rosswog, C. et al. Chromothripsis followed by circular recombination drives
oncogene ampliﬁcation in human cancer. Nat. Genet. 53, 1673–1685 (2021).
243. Von Hoff, D. D. et al. Double minutes arise from circular extrachromosomal DNA
intermediates which integrate into chromosomal sites in human HL-60 leuke-
mia cells. J. Clin. Invest. 85, 1887–1895 (1990).
244. Zeng, X., Wan, M. & Wu, J. ecDNA within tumors: a new mechanism that drives
tumor heterogeneity and drug resistance. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 5, 277
(2020).
245. Bonatti, S. et al. Preferential loss of chromosomes containing ampliﬁed DNA
regions in cultured cells. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 318, 271–276 (1989).
246. Kuttler, F. & Mai, S. Formation of non-random extrachromosomal elements
during development, differentiation and oncogenesis. Semin Cancer Biol. 17,
56–64 (2007).
247. Singer, M. J. et al. Ampliﬁcation of the human dihydrofolate reductase gene via
double minutes is initiated by chromosome breaks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97,
7921–7926 (2000).
248. Narath, R. et al. Induction of senescence in MYCN ampliﬁed neuroblastoma cell
lines by hydroxyurea. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 46, 130–142 (2007).
249. Eckhardt, S. G. et al. Induction of differentiation in HL60 cells by the reduction of
extrachromosomally ampliﬁed c-myc. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91, 6674–6678
(1994).
250. Guan, X. Y. et al. Oncogenic role of eIF-5A2 in the development of ovarian
cancer. Cancer Res. 64, 4197–4200 (2004).
251. Yu, L. et al. Gemcitabine eliminates double minute chromosomes from human
ovarian cancer cells. PLoS ONE 8, e71988 (2013).
252. Snapka, R. M. & Varshavsky, A. Loss of unstably ampliﬁed dihydrofolate reduc-
tase genes from mouse cells is greatly accelerated by hydroxyurea. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 80, 7533–7537 (1983).
253. Vitale, I., Shema, E., Loi, S. & Galluzzi, L. Intratumoral heterogeneity in cancer
progression and response to immunotherapy. Nat. Med. 27, 212–224 (2021).
254. Dagogo-Jack, I. & Shaw, A. T. Tumour heterogeneity and resistance to cancer
therapies. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 15, 81–94 (2018).
255. Windle, B. et al. A central role for chromosome breakage in gene ampliﬁcation,
deletion formation, and amplicon integration. Genes Dev. 5, 160–174 (1991).
256. Lundberg, G. et al. Binomial mitotic segregation of MYCN-carrying double
minutes in neuroblastoma illustrates the role of randomness in oncogene
ampliﬁcation. PLoS ONE 3, e3099 (2008).
257. Levan, A. & Levan, G. Have double minutes functioning centromeres? Hereditas
88, 81–92 (1978).
258. Xue, Y. et al. An approach to suppress the evolution of resistance in
BRAF(V600E)-mutant cancer. Nat. Med. 23, 929–937 (2017).
259. Nikolaev, S. et al. Extrachromosomal driver mutations in glioblastoma and low-
grade glioma. Nat. Commun. 5, 5690 (2014).
260. Zhou, Y. H. et al. The role of EGFR double minutes in modulating the response of
malignant gliomas to radiotherapy. Oncotarget 8, 80853–80868 (2017).
261. Song, B. et al. Molecular mechanism of chemoresistance by miR-215 in osteo-
sarcoma and colon cancer cells. Mol. Cancer 9, 96 (2010).
262. Álvarez-González, B. et al. Methotrexate gold nanocarriers: loading and release
study: its activity in colon and lung cancer cells. Molecules 25, 6049 (2020).
263. Dabrowska, M., Skoneczny, M., Uram, L. & Rode, W. Methotrexate-induced
senescence of human colon cancer cells depends on p53 acetylation, but not
genomic aberrations. Anticancer Drugs 30, 374–382 (2019).
264. Dabrowska, M. et al. Oxidative stress and inhibition of nitric oxide generation
underlie methotrexate-induced senescence in human colon cancer cells. Mech.
Ageing Dev. 170, 22–29 (2018).
265. Ciro, Y. et al. Production, physicochemical characterization, and anticancer
activity of methotrexate-loaded phytic acid-chitosan nanoparticles on HT-29
human colon adenocarcinoma cells. Carbohydr. Polym. 243, 116436 (2020).
266. Morales, C. et al. Dihydrofolate reductase ampliﬁcation and sensitization to
methotrexate of methotrexate-resistant colon cancer cells. Mol. Cancer Ther. 8,
424–432 (2009).
267. Cai,
M.
et
al.
Inhibiting
homologous
recombination
decreases
extra-
chromosomal ampliﬁcation but has no effect on intrachromosomal ampliﬁca-
tion in methotrexate-resistant colon cancer cells. Int J. Cancer 144, 1037–1048
(2019).
268. Waggoner, S. E. Cervical cancer. Lancet 361, 2217–2225 (2003).
269. Li, H., Wu, X. & Cheng, X. Advances in diagnosis and treatment of metastatic
cervical cancer. J. Gynecol. Oncol. 27, e43 (2016).
270. Li, X. et al. CRISPR/Cas9 nanoeditor of double knockout large fragments of E6
and E7 oncogenes for reversing drugs resistance in cervical cancer. J. Nano-
biotechnology 19, 231 (2021).
271. Zhu, H. et al. Molecular mechanisms of cisplatin resistance in cervical cancer.
Drug Des. Dev. Ther. 10, 1885–1895 (2016).
272. Ruiz-Herrera, A. et al. Gene ampliﬁcation in human cells knocked down for
RAD54. Genome Integr. 2, 5 (2011).
273. Von Hoff, D. D. et al. Hydroxyurea accelerates loss of extrachromosomally
ampliﬁed genes from tumor cells. Cancer Res. 51, 6273–6279 (1991).
274. Lin, C. et al. Encoding gene RAB3B exists in linear chromosomal and circular
extrachromosomal DNA and contributes to cisplatin resistance of hypophar-
yngeal squamous cell carcinoma via inducing autophagy. Cell Death Dis. 13, 171
(2022).
275. Zhu, J. et al. Molecular characterization of cell-free eccDNAs in human plasma.
Sci. Rep. 7, 10968 (2017).
276. Wei, J. et al. The biogenesis and roles of extrachromosomal oncogene involved
in carcinogenesis and evolution. Am. J. Cancer Res. 10, 3532–3550 (2020).
277. Bronkhorst, A. J., Ungerer, V. & Holdenrieder, S. The emerging role of cell-free
DNA as a molecular marker for cancer management. Biomol. Detect. Quantif. 17,
100087 (2019).
278. Cen, Y. et al. Global characterization of extrachromosomal circular DNAs in
advanced high grade serous ovarian cancer. Cell Death Dis. 13, 342 (2022).
279. Kanada, M., Bachmann, M. H. & Contag, C. H. Signaling by extracellular vesicles
advances cancer hallmarks. Trends Cancer 2, 84–94 (2016).
280. Fan, Y. et al. Frequency of double minute chromosomes and combined cyto-
genetic abnormalities and their characteristics. J. Appl. Genet. 52, 53–59 (2011).
281. Minina, V. I. et al. Chromosome aberrations in peripheral blood lymphocytes of
lung cancer patients exposed to radon and air pollution. Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 27,
6–12 (2018).
282. Schmidt, H. et al. Small polydispersed circular DNA contains strains of mobile
genetic elements and occurs more frequently in permanent cell lines of
malignant tumors than in normal lymphocytes. Oncol. Rep. 22, 393–400 (2009).
283. Henson, J. D. et al. DNA C-circles are speciﬁc and quantiﬁable markers of
alternative-lengthening-of-telomeres activity. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 1181–1185
(2009).
284. Fogli, A. et al. Detection of the alternative lengthening of telomeres pathway in
malignant gliomas for improved molecular diagnosis. J. Neurooncol. 135,
381–390 (2017).
285. Lv, W. et al. Circle-Seq reveals genomic and disease-speciﬁc hallmarks in urinary
cell-free extrachromosomal circular DNAs. Clin. Transl. Med. 12, e817 (2022).
286. Yang, H. et al. Identiﬁcation and characterization of extrachromosomal circular
DNA in human placentas with fetal growth restriction. Front. Immunol. 12,
780779 (2021).
287. Neidlinger, C. et al. Increased amounts of small polydisperse circular DNA
(spcDNA) in angioﬁbroma-derived cell cultures from patients with tuberous
sclerosis (TS). Hum. Genet. 79, 286–288 (1988).
288. Motejlek, K., Assum, G., Krone, W. & Kleinschmidt, A. K. The size of small poly-
disperse circular DNA (spcDNA) in angioﬁbroma-derived cell cultures from
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
20
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 


--- Page 21 ---
patients with tuberous sclerosis (TSC) differs from that in ﬁbroblasts. Hum.
Genet. 87, 6–10 (1991).
289. Song, P. et al. Limitations and opportunities of technologies for the analysis of
cell-free DNA in cancer diagnostics. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 6, 232–245 (2022).
290. Sin, S. T. et al. Effects of nucleases on cell-free extrachromosomal circular DNA.
JCI Insight. 7, e156070 (2022).
291. Li, R., Wang, Y., Li, J. & Zhou, X. Extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA): an
emerging star in cancer. Biomark. Res. 10, 53 (2022).
292. Li, Z., Wang, B., Liang, H. & Han, L. Pioneering insights of extrachromosomal DNA
(ecDNA) generation, action and its implications for cancer therapy. Int J. Biol. Sci.
18, 4006–4025 (2022).
293. Schoenlein, P. V. et al. Radiation therapy depletes extrachromosomally ampliﬁed
drug resistance genes and oncogenes from tumor cells via micronuclear cap-
ture of episomes and double minute chromosomes. Int J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol.
Phys. 55, 1051–1065 (2003).
294. Raymond, E. et al. Effects of hydroxyurea on extrachromosomal DNA in patients
with advanced ovarian carcinomas. Clin. Cancer Res. 7, 1171–1180 (2001).
295. Circular DNA throws gene regulation for a loop. Cancer Discov. 10, 170 (2020).
296. Hong, J., Zheng, S. & Jiang, D. The contributions of extrachromosomal DNA
elements in neoplasm progression. Am. J. Cancer Res. 11, 2417–2429 (2021).
297. Wang, Y. X. et al. The emerging roles of extracellular vesicles in ovarian cancer.
Curr. Drug Metab. 22, 139–149 (2021).
298. Zhang, P. et al. ecc_ﬁnder: a robust and accurate tool for detecting extra-
chromosomal circular DNA from sequencing data. Front. Plant Sci. 12, 743742
(2021).
299. Møller, H. D. Circle-Seq: isolation and sequencing of chromosome-derived cir-
cular DNA elements in cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 2119, 165–181 (2020).
300. Wang, S. W. et al. Current applications and future perspective of CRISPR/Cas9
gene editing in cancer. Mol. Cancer 21, 57 (2022).
301. Selvakumar, S. C. et al. CRISPR/Cas9 and next generation sequencing in the
personalized treatment of Cancer. Mol. Cancer 21, 83 (2022).
302. Amitai, G. & Sorek, R. CRISPR-Cas adaptation: insights into the mechanism of
action. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 67–76 (2016).
303. CRISPR technology. Nat Biotechnol. 40, 832 (2022).
304. Fellmann, C. et al. Cornerstones of CRISPR-Cas in drug discovery and therapy.
Nat. Rev. Drug Disco. 16, 89–100 (2017).
305. High, K., Gregory, P. D. & Gersbach, C. CRISPR technology for gene therapy. Nat.
Med. 20, 476–477 (2014).
306. Doudna, J. A. & Charpentier, E. Genome editing. The new frontier of genome
engineering with CRISPR-Cas9. Science 346, 1258096 (2014).
307. Pineda, M., Lear, A., Collins, J. P. & Kiani, S. Safe CRISPR: challenges and possible
solutions. Trends Biotechnol. 37, 389–401 (2019).
308. Zhan, T. et al. CRISPR/Cas9 for cancer research and therapy. Semin Cancer Biol.
55, 106–119 (2019).
309. Sánchez-Rivera, F. J. & Jacks, T. Applications of the CRISPR-Cas9 system in cancer
biology. Nat. Rev. Cancer 15, 387–395 (2015).
310. Gu, X. et al. Novel insights into extrachromosomal DNA: redeﬁning the onco-
drivers of tumor progression. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 39, 215 (2020).
311. Arrey, G., Keating, S. T. & Regenberg, B. A unifying model for extrachromosomal
circular DNA load in eukaryotic cells. Semin Cell Dev. Biol. 128, 40–50 (2022).
312. Chiu, R. W. K. et al. What is extrachromosomal circular DNA and what does it do?
Clin. Chem. 66, 754–759 (2020).
313. Yu, M. et al. Interferon-γ induces tumor resistance to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy
by promoting YAP phase separation. Mol. Cell 81, 1216–1230.e1219 (2021).
314. Bouchard, J. J. et al. Cancer mutations of the tumor suppressor SPOP disrupt the
formation of active, phase-separated compartments. Mol. Cell 72, 19–36.e18
(2018).
315. Autiero, M. et al. Intragenic ampliﬁcation and formation of extrachromosomal
small circular DNA molecules from the PIP gene on chromosome 7 in primary
breast carcinomas. Int J. Cancer 99, 370–377 (2002).
316. Liu, J. et al. MDM2 inhibition-mediated autophagy contributes to the pro-
apoptotic effect of berberine in p53-null leukemic cells. Life Sci. 242, 117228
(2020).
317. Medves, S. et al. A high rate of telomeric sister chromatid exchange occurs in
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia B-cells. Br. J. Haematol. 174, 57–70 (2016).
318. Khatami, F., Larijani, B. & Tavangar, S. M. The presence of tumor extra-
chomosomal circular DNA (ecDNA) as a component of liquid biopsy in blood.
Med. Hypotheses 114, 5–7 (2018).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
license,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
Extrachromosomal circular DNA: biogenesis, structure, functions and. . .
Yang et al.
21
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2022) 7:342 
