--- Page 1 ---
Immunological Reviews. 2019;288:49–63. 
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/imr
  |  49
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. 
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1 | INTRODUCTION
This review will focus on new insights into how germinal center (GC) 
B cells (GCBC) are reprogrammed to undergo positive and negative 
selection, and how the process of differentiation into long-­lived 
progeny is controlled. After an initial overview of the GC process as 
a whole, in order to provide context, the review will focus on GCBC 
and the selective processes that operate on them to generate popu-
lations of GCBC with increased affinity for Ag (“affinity maturation”) 
yet without autoreactivity. Lastly, the progeny of GCBC that have 
differentiated into either long-­lived memory B cells (MBC) or anti-
body forming cells (AFC) will be discussed.
2 | THE PURPOSE OF THE GC
The germinal center (GC) reaction is elicited in B-­cell follicles of 
secondary lymphoid tissues in response to a variety of infections 
and immunization regimes. In GCs, B lineage cells differentiate 
into a unique state driven by a specific transcriptional program. 
These cells undergo intense proliferation along with somatic 
mutation of their B cell receptor (BCR) V regions, matched by 
a nearly equal rate of cell death. The purpose of this process is 
not to create immediate effector function—unlike other phases 
of adaptive T-­ and B-­cell responses—but rather to select for mu-
tants with higher affinity for antigen (Ag) as well as to diversify 
the response from single clonotypes (i.e., progeny of single un-
mutated cells) to a family of clonotypes that have a single parent 
cell but differ by various mutations. In addition, the GC reaction 
seeds small numbers of longer lived B lineage cells—MBC and 
long-­lived plasma cells (LLPC)—that have been subject to this 
selection process. These cells, though quite rare compared to 
the number of GC precursor cells, confer lifelong immunity and, 
though quiescent, are the ultimate “effector functions” spawned 
by the GC. Hence, the GC reaction is geared toward optimizing 
future immunity more than acute effector function and patho-
gen clearance, though under some circumstances it can partici-
pate in the latter.
 
Received: 10 January 2019  |  Accepted: 24 January 2019
DOI: 10.1111/imr.12744
I N V I T E D  R E V I E W
Linking signaling and selection in the germinal center
Mark J. Shlomchik
 |   Wei Luo
 |   Florian Weisel
Department of Immunology, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania
Correspondence
Mark J. Shlomchik, Department of 
Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School 
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA.
Email: mshlomch@pitt.edu
Funding information
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, Grant/Award Number: 1R01 
AI105018 and 2R01 AI043603
Summary
Germinal centers (GC) are sites of rapid B-­cell proliferation in response to certain 
types of immunization. They arise in about 1 week and can persist for several months. 
In GCs, B cells differentiate in a unique way and begin to undergo somatic mutation 
of the Ig V regions at a high rate. GC B cells (GCBC) thus undergo clonal diversifica-
tion that can affect the affinity of the newly mutant B-­cell receptor (BCR) for its driv-
ing antigen. Through processes that are still poorly understood, GCBC with higher 
affinity are selectively expanded while those with mutations that inactivate the BCR 
are lost. In addition, at various times during the extended GC reaction, some GCBC 
undergo differentiation into either long-­lived memory B cells (MBC) or plasma cells. 
The cellular and molecular signals that govern these fate decisions are not well-­
understood, but are an active area of research in multiple laboratories. In this review, 
we cover both the history of this field and focus on recent work that has helped to 
elucidate the signals and molecules, such as key transcription factors, that coordinate 
both positive selection as well as differentiation of GCBC.
K E Y W O R D S
B-cell receptor, B cells, CD40, affinity maturation, c-Myc
This article is part of a series of reviews covering Germinal Center and Extrafollicular 
Immune Responses appearing in Volume 288 of  Immunological Reviews.


--- Page 2 ---
50  |    
SHLOMCHIK et al.
3 | KEY COMPONENTS OF THE GC
Germinal centers are composed of three main cell types: B cells, CD4 
T cells, and stromal cells. The GCBC have undergone a particular and 
distinctive type of differentiation that distinguishes them from other 
types of activated B cells. This includes a comprehensive alteration 
of gene expression, chromatin landscape and conformation, and of 
course protein expression.1-3 A necessary and distinguishing aspect 
of GCBC is expression of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6.4 The 
CD4 T cells found in the GC—termed follicular helper T cells—have 
also undergone distinctive differentiation, again mediated in large 
part by Bcl6 expression.5,6 These two specialized subtypes of B and 
T cell undergo extensive interactions within the GC that helps to 
orchestrate the evolution of diverse and high-­affinity B-­cell clones, 
and which also contributes to long-­term T-­cell memory.7-9 A poten-
tially related subpopulation of FoxP3/Bcl6+  CD4 T cells, termed fol-
licular regulatory T cells also accumulates in the GC over time; the 
functions of these cells are not as clear, as they may contribute to 
both affinity maturation and self-­tolerance10-12 (see Review in this 
Issue).
Germinal centers nucleate and expand within the B-­cell zone of 
lymphoid follicles, which contain a population of stromal cells called 
follicular dendritic cells (FDC).13,14 These cells are distinct from, but 
probably related to, analogous fibroblastic reticular cells found in T-­
cell zones.15 While the functions of FDC remain enigmatic, they are 
thought to provide structural and contact support for B-­cell follicle 
development as well as GC development.16 Though FDC were orig-
inally reported to express both BAFF and CXCL13,17 critical factors 
for B-­cell survival and attraction, more recent data suggests that dis-
tinct fibroblastic reticular cells (not FDC) are nonredundant sources 
of these factors.18 FDC express both complement receptors (CD21 
and CD35) and Fcgr2b, both of which can trap opsonized Ag in the 
form of immune complexes (ICs).19-21 The function of Ag trapping is 
controversial (as will be discussed below), but a dominant view is that 
this Ag is critical for the development and maintenance of the GC as 
a nonredundant source of Ag for GCBC.22 More recently a unique 
stromal cell was identified within a region of the GC termed the dark 
zone (DZ, see below), characterized by its expression of the CXCR4 
ligand, CXCL12, and hence termed the CRC for CXCL12-­expressing 
reticular cell23,24
4 | SELECTION IN THE GC
Germinal center B cells can have four possible fates: differentiation 
(into MBC or PC), death, or cycling through a round of mutation and 
selection. The net effect is selection of higher affinity GCBC as well 
as development of long-­lived humoral immune populations.
Selection is the result of progressive expansion of more fit 
(generally thought to be “higher affinity”) B-­cell clones and sub-
clones—either through reduced cell death or increased cell division. 
Differences in fitness among B cells in a GC, with respect to affinity-­
based selection, must be encoded in some way by the BCR itself. 
Thus, the major drivers that generate the substrate for selection 
are somatic hypermutation of V regions, which occurs within the 
GC25 (and also outside of it26,27), as well as the entry into the GC 
of diverse, unmutated naive B cells (NBC).28,29 In the context of a 
memory response, MBC can also join the GC, providing additional 
sources of diversity as well as a higher affinity starting point for the 
reaction, depending upon the context (e.g., cross-­reactive vs same 
exact Ag in the secondary response).30-33
Germinal center B cells are in active cell cycle, with average di-
vision times estimated to be 6-­8 hours, likely near the theoretical 
limit for cell cycle length.34-36 At the same time, GCBC highly ex-
press the activation induced cytidine deaminase (AID) protein, which 
is required to introduce various mutations into the DNA encoding 
immunoglobulin (Ig) V regions.37-39 As a result, with each division 
there is an average of 0.5-­1 new mutations (mainly point mutations) 
per cell.40,41 As the GC reaction reaches its peak size, the rate of cell 
death will approximately equal the rate of cell birth, a state that will 
persist for weeks to months depending upon the context. It has been 
estimated that at any given time between 10% and 30% of GCBC 
cells are undergoing apoptosis, with this in part depending upon the 
affinity of the cells’ BCR for Ag.36,42 Thus, for long periods of time 
the GC reaction will churn, neither expanding nor contracting, but 
creating a diversity of V region mutants.
Cell death in the GC can in principle be due to either failure 
of positive selection or active negative selection of BCR mu-
tants. Of GCBC that have failed positive selection, some mutant 
cells will lack a functional BCR; the most obvious mechanism for 
this outcome is a mutation that generates a frameshift or a stop 
codon, preventing protein production. However, such mutations 
that adversely affect fundamental structure (as opposed to mu-
tations that adversely affect specific Ag binding because they are 
in or near Ag contact residues) are surprisingly common. It has 
been estimated that about half of all replacement mutations in 
the framework regions of V genes also will meaningfully alter rel-
atively invariant residues and result in poorly-­formed BCRs, which 
are subsequently selected against.43,44 Since framework regions 
constitute three-­fourths of the V region, and since the typical ratio 
of R:S mutations is ~3, this category must account for a significant 
fraction of all cell death in the GC. Such mutations could be con-
sidered an extreme aspect of failure of positive selection. More 
subtly, B cells with BCRs that had V region mutations that lowered 
affinity or even failed to improve affinity may fail to obtain needed 
positive signals (see below) to either prevent cell death or promote 
proliferation.
At the same time that these processes are honing GC populations 
in a Darwinian fashion, some GCBC exit cell cycle and differentiate 
into either MBC or PC. At least during the peak of the GC response, 
on a net basis this differentiation is of relatively small magnitude 
compared to the overall GC reaction,45 and thus unlikely to affect 
GC cell numbers. Nonetheless, these differentiation processes are 
crucial; yet, their transitory nature and the relatively small number 
of cells that they affect at any given time have made them difficult to 
study. Hence, the sites, stages, and signals that control MBC and PC 


--- Page 3 ---
    |  51
SHLOMCHIK et al.
differentiation within the GC are still in the process of being worked 
out, as will be discussed below.
5 | GC ZONAL STRUCTURE
The GC can be divided into two zones, called the “dark” and “light” 
zones, based on their original appearances in hematoxylin and eosin-­
stained histologic sections. The DZ is more densely packed with cells, 
the nuclei of which stain blue, hence the term “dark zone”. The light 
zone (LZ) is populated by FDCs, whose cellular processes and cyto-
plasm occupy space, leading to a less packed appearance.13,46 The 
polarization of the GC can easily be appreciated by immunohistol-
ogy if the FDC are stained, which demarcates the LZ. Immunologists 
have been preoccupied with deciphering and specifying the unique 
functions of the two GC zones. In our view, it is best to describe 
activities and cell types that are more likely to occur in one zone vs 
another, rather than to conceptualize activities as being completely 
specific to a particular zone. The most well-­known zonal characteris-
tic is proliferation; it was originally proposed—and is still taught—that 
proliferation is restricted to the DZ, where the GCBC have accord-
ingly been termed “centroblasts”.13,46 Cells in the LZ, termed “cen-
trocytes” were thought to be quiescent. While various histologic 
and cell cycle flow-­based analysis does show a higher proportion of 
cells in the DZ are in cell cycle (e.g., in S-­phase), a substantial albeit 
lesser proportion of GCBC in the LZ are also in cycle.35,47,48 Hence, 
it is correct to state that proliferation occurs more frequently in the 
DZ than the LZ rather than solely in the DZ. The LZ also contains a 
higher proportion of TFH cells, at a reported ratio of about 1.5:1 to 
2:1; but again, there are TFH in the DZ as well.49 Despite the less than 
complete segregation of cell types and activities to one zone or the 
other, there are clearly important functional differences between 
the zones of the GC.
6 | THE GC CYCLE AND ITS 
RELATIONSHIP TO SELECTIVE PROCESSES
Perhaps the major question in the field is how does the GC process 
select cells that have increased affinity for Ag. Models of mutation, 
affinity maturation, and selection have predicted that multiple cy-
cles of this process would be necessary in order to enrich for R mu-
tations in complementarity determining regions of V regions to the 
extent seen in affinity matured B cell clones and to drive affinity-­
based selection. Theoretical models coupled with the notion that 
proliferation was restricted to the DZ while Ag was restricted to the 
LZ (concepts that have been more recently modified, as discussed 
below) suggested the notion that key events in the cycle would be 
zonally restricted.50-54 However, it was unclear where the events 
that would underlie selection actually occurred and what types of 
inter-­ and intrazonal migration were taking place in the mature GC. 
Early in vivo imaging studies revealed multiple interesting patterns 
of GCBC migration, including DZ to LZ and back at relatively low 
but measurable levels, as well as prominent intrazonal migration in 
which cells turned at the border of the LZ/DZ and at the edges of 
the GC.34,35,55-57 Contacts between GCBC and TFH were generally 
brief; similarly, GCBC did not often interact with FDC for long peri-
ods, although some exceptional cells could be seen dwelling adjacent 
to FDC. From these studies, it could be concluded that there are 
flexible paths for GCBC and multiple modes of cell-­cell interaction; 
however, there was not sufficient data in terms of quantity or dura-
tion of cell interactions to make firm conclusions or to build convinc-
ing models.
A major breakthrough was the use of photoactivatable GFP to 
label cells in a region at a given time, followed by tracking of such 
labeled cells into different zones at various subsequent times.58 
This, coupled with experimentally delivering of T cell Ag to all 
GCBC, thus conferring the ability to recruit T-­cell help to GCBC en 
masse, allowed a more precise understanding of events and move-
ments associated with positive selection. In this landmark study, 
Victora et al found that initial encounter with T-­cell help led first 
to GC retention in the LZ for up to 12 hours, followed by GCBC 
migration into the DZ. Under the conditions studied, which most 
likely involved supraphysiologic T cell-­derived signals, these GCBC 
remained in the DZ for several days, where they proliferated. This 
population of GCBC then emerged from the DZ and some of them 
migrated to the LZ, while others most likely died. These obser-
vations were most compatible with a model in which productive 
T-­cell encounter in the LZ triggers a shift in gene expression (spe-
cifically chemokine receptor expression), that leads to migration 
toward the DZ. In the DZ proliferation for one to a few cell cycles 
ensues, along with rounds of somatic V region mutation, followed 
by quiescence and return to the LZ. In the LZ, affinity of newly mu-
tated receptors is again tested as a function of ability to capture 
and present Ag to T cells.
7 | AG IN THE GC
While these studies provided a basic outline of how GCBC traffic 
and respond to T cell help, they did not elucidate how GCBC received 
and processed Ag-­dependent signals that would lead to positive se-
lection of higher affinity GCBC. The first question to be addressed in 
how affinity is tested asks where Ag comes from and in what forms 
is it encountered by B cells in the GC. The observation that Ag can 
be seen deposited on FDC of immune animals14,59-61 has sparked a 
debate about how GCBC encounter Ag. FDC do not possess uni-
versal receptors for all types of Ag, but rather can bind to ICs that 
consist of Ag that has already elicited an immune response or at the 
least has been recognized by the immune system, i.e., has been “op-
sonized”.62-64 There are two receptors that mediate opsonized Ag-­
capture by FDC: CR1/2 (CD21/35) and Fcgr2b.19,20,65-67 The ligands 
for these receptors generally depend on Ig binding to Ag; the only 
exception would be the relatively few Ags that naturally activate the 
alternative pathway of complement and can fix C3 and C4 fragments 
to themselves in the absence of any Ig.


--- Page 4 ---
52  |    
SHLOMCHIK et al.
It is well-­known that B cells, unlike MHC-­restricted T cells, 
respond to soluble Ag both in vitro and in vivo. Indeed, it is well-­
accepted that primary B-­cell responses initiate in response to solu-
ble Ags. While some studies have argued that only relatively smaller 
Ags can rapidly transit “conduits” that lead from capsular lymphatics 
to the center of B-­cell follicles,68,69 multiple other studies have indi-
cated that Ags that are at least the size of Ig can reach follicular B 
cells and bind their BCRs within a matter of a few hours postinjec-
tion, if not more quickly.70-73 Our recent experiment, in which we 
injected soluble anti-­IgM into mice harboring active GCs, demon-
strated a biological effect of induction of c-­Myc protein expression, 
in just four hours, indicating a very rapid delivery of the initial sig-
nal.72 Hence, it seems that soluble Ag can indeed reach GCBC and 
ligate their BCR effectively.
Nonetheless, based largely on observational studies of the pres-
ence of Ag in immune animals as well as in vivo imaging in which B cells 
can be seen capturing Ag that had been seeded on FDC,68,74-77 a stan-
dard thinking has emerged that GCBC normally do or even must obtain 
their Ag from FDC and not from the “soluble” milieu.78,79 To test this 
idea, some years ago, we created mice that had B cells carrying a B1-­8 
VDJ transgene linked to a mutant IgM constant region that could only 
express membrane, but not secreted Ig. Together with a λ1 light chain, 
the IgH chain encodes anti-­nitrophenyl (NP) specificity and the mice 
mount responses to NP; however, we found that the mice can respond 
to diverse Ags by combining this Vh transgene with other L chains.80 
Whether immunized with NP-­carrier or carrier alone, these animals 
made vigorous, and in fact supra-­normal, GC responses. Yet, lacking 
soluble Ab, they had no means to deposit Ag on FDC via either of the 
two Ag-­capture receptors on FDC (and we were able to show at least 
a 1000-­fold decrement of Ag deposition to undetectably low levels). 
In addition, Manser and colleagues found that amplified IC deposition 
on FDCs seen in mice that lacked the common FcR gamma chain (and 
hence did not trap ICs on other cell types) did not result in an enhanced 
GC response.81 Furthermore, mice lacking Fcgr2b did not have reduced 
GC magnitude or kinetics, although IgG IC deposition on FDC would 
have been reduced in such mice.82 Robust GC reactions can also be 
elicited simply by the transfer of B cells that express a retroviral supe-
rantigen in a system that lacked detectable FDC and which in any case 
would have been unlikely to permit Ag-­capture by FDC.83 Thus, while 
under some circumstances GCBC likely can productively encounter Ag 
on FDC, at least in the case of soluble Ags, such encounter is not neces-
sary to promote normal or even exaggerated GC responses.
CR1/2 ligation on FDC is also important for the GC reaction, as 
shown by bone marrow chimera experiments,84,85 but this continues 
to be the case even when there is no Ab available to fix comple-
ment.86 To resolve this apparent paradox, we used a genetic BCR 
engineering approach to create mice that could neither secrete Ig 
nor fix C’ at the membrane surface due to a mutation in the BCR CH2 
domain.86,87 These B cells, unlike WT B cells, could not fix C’ to their 
own surface and did not facilitate GC responses. From these experi-
ments, we concluded that CR1/2 ligation on FDC likely provides pos-
itive signals to these cells and that B cells can fix C3/C4 fragments to 
their own surface upon BCR ligation (as also concluded by others88) 
and that these ligands can provide signals to both B cells and FDCs. 
In any case, we could not find evidence of positive nonredundant 
roles for Ag deposited on FDC.
These results directly challenged the current dogma that Ag 
needs to be presented to GCBC on the surface of FDC. While several 
reviews did acknowledge these results,22,79,89 it was not widely cred-
ited, with nearly all reviews and diagrams depicting the recognition 
of Ag by GCBC on FDC surfaces, rather than as soluble Ag.90,91 Most 
recently we retested this issue in a novel system. We immunized a 
different strain of mice that also expressed only surface BCR but 
lacked secreted Ig; in this strain, BCRs assembled normally in the en-
dogenous locus. Similar to our previous result, we obtained massive 
GC responses, despite the fact that these mice could not opsonize 
Ag and therefore could not deposit it on FDC.72 In fact, analysis of c-­
Myc expression in the GCBC of these animals (see below) suggested 
that they were achieving an abnormally high degree of BCR signal-
ing, despite the lack of Ag opsonization and deposition. This discus-
sion challenges the field to reconsider its still-­current dogma, and 
to evaluate the hard evidence that supports the idea that Ag only 
reaches BCRs on GCBC in the LZ that interact with FDC.
If Ag on FDC is not required for GC development and mainte-
nance, then what is the purpose of Ab-­dependent Ag deposition on 
FDC? We have suggested92 that such Ag could be suppressive, by 
providing a source of ligand for Fcgr2b that is expressed on GCBC. 
Normal GCBC upregulate Fcgr2b, while GCBC from autoimmune-­
prone mice that tend to make larger GC reactions do not do this, sug-
gesting that Fcgr2b may play an important inhibitory role on GCBC.93 
Further, Tiller et al94 found that self-­reactive GCBC developed selec-
tively in mice lacking Fcrg2b, again consistent with the notion that Ag 
trapped by this receptor on FDC plays a tolerizing role. It could even 
be argued that Ag on FDC is unlikely to be readily accessible to GCBC 
BCRs, as the available epitopes will likely be bound by preexisting 
Ab that served to opsonize the Ag. Such interactions that lead to IC 
formation tend to be highly stable and not easily reversible within 
the context of a complex Ag-­Ab lattice. In line with this idea, GCs 
in both strains of mice that lacked secreted Ab (and thus lacked ICs 
on FDC) were unusually large and in the most recent publication it 
was shown that a high fraction of the GCBC had evidence of a recent 
positive BCR signal.72,80 This would be in keeping with more, rather 
than less, Ag signaling in the absence of FDC Ag-­capture. In this vein, 
an additional and nonexclusive function of FDC Ag-­capture could be 
to reduce Ag concentration, thus making it more limiting and thereby 
driving affinity maturation through more intense selection.
8 | HOW DOES AG SIGNAL TO THE GCBC?
Since the GC is thought to be continually Ag-­driven, and affinity mat-
uration by definition is driven by Ag, signals that depend on the inter-
action between Ag and the GCBC are central to understanding how 
the GC functions. Ag could affect GCBC by two major mechanisms: it 
can signal via the BCR, or it could be captured via the BCR and pep-
tides derived from it presented on MHCII, garnering various signals 


--- Page 5 ---
    |  53
SHLOMCHIK et al.
from cognate T cells. These latter signals could include CD40L, IL-­21, 
and other cytokines, adhesion molecule interactions, and other less-­
well defined contact-­dependent costimulatory interactions.
8.1 | BCR signals
With the hypothesis that affinity maturation in the GC must relate 
to differences in how the signals of high-­ and low-­affinity BCR liga-
tion are either generated or interpreted, we set out to define BCR 
signaling in GCBC and how it compared to that in NBC. Using a com-
bination of flow cytometry and western blotting, we were surprised 
to find that BCR signals in the GC were markedly attenuated; re-
duced signaling could be tracked back as far as the phosphorylation 
of CD79, the BCR signal transducing components.95 Biochemical and 
inhibitor data pointed to increased phosphatase activity as a major 
reason for reduction in GCBC BCR signal transduction. However, we 
did not identify specific phosphatases, although we presented some 
evidence that both SHIP-­1 and SHP-­1 may be activated in GCBC.
Subsequently, similar data in different systems were reported by 
others. He et al96 found reduced BCR proximal signaling activity in 
both IgG1 and IgE expressing GCBC in mice. Using Nur77-­GFP Tg 
mice, which carry a reporter of BCR (and to a lesser extent CD40) 
signaling, Zikherman and colleagues97 also found evidence of less 
spontaneous and inducible GCBC BCR signaling in the form of re-
duced GFP expression. Nowosad et al found reduced proximal BCR 
signal transduction in response to soluble BCR ligands, but using 
image analysis they concluded that GCBC had intact proximal BCR 
signals when presented with highly cross-­linking ligand contained 
on membranes. These data suggest that, at least to some extent, 
the relative block in proximal BCR signal transduction in GCBC 
could be overcome with very strong ligation (and/or specific qual-
itative aspects of ligation such as inability to internalize the ligand). 
Nonetheless, even very strong ligation resulted in no detectable 
NFκB nuclear translocation in GCBC.98
8.2 | T cell-­mediated signals
The finding that BCR signaling was relatively desensitized in GCBC 
suggested that positive selection could largely if not entirely be 
driven by T-­cell signals that would be delivered preferentially to 
those GCBC that succeeded in capturing and presenting peptides 
from Ag most efficiently, which in turn would be a function of BCR 
affinity.58,99 Indeed, MHCII expression on B cells is required for GC 
development and maintenance.100
One prominent T-­cell signal is CD40L; it has long been known 
that blocking CD40L:CD40 interactions leads to acute dissolution of 
the GC reaction.101 A second important signal is IL-­21. In the absence 
of IL-­21R on B cells, GCs form but they are not well-­sustained once 
they reach peak.102,103 IL-­4 can also contribute to GC development 
and growth, particularly in synergy with IL-­21.103,104
The interactions between GCBC and TFH are mutual and the na-
ture of these mutual interactions could determine selection. GCBC 
express CD80 and CD86, with the latter being particularly critical for 
sustaining the GC reaction, presumably via signals through CD28. 
Perhaps more interestingly, Qi and colleagues provided in vivo im-
aging data supporting a model in which the quality of the signal re-
ceived by GCBC from T cells leads to commensurate upregulation of 
ICOSL on the GCBC, due to increased receipt of CD40 signals from 
the TFH, resulting in an affinity-­selecting positive feedback loop. The 
more productive signals from this positive feedback can be visual-
ized as an “entangled” interaction between GCBC and TFH which is 
both more prolonged and complex, resulting in Ca signaling.99
Integrins, which are known to control the quality and duration of 
cell-­cell interactions, are also important in the GC reaction. Integrins 
can affect GCBC-­FDC interactions16 as well as GCBC-­TFH interac-
tions.105 Although genetic deletion of key integrins does reduce GC 
quality and affect affinity and diversity,16,105 whether these integrins 
are modulated naturally in an affinity-­dependent way has not been 
demonstrated. Thus, it is unclear if, under normal circumstances, in-
tegrins selectively influence affinity maturation.
9 | SIGNAL INTEGRATION AND 
INTERPRETATION FOR POSITIVE 
SELECTION
Although the surface receptors on GCBC that could transduce posi-
tive selection—such as BCR, CD40, and cytokine receptors—have 
been known for many years, their identification did not explain how 
signals from them, either singly or in combination, would be inter-
preted by GCBC to lead to positive selection. Elucidation of how 
these receptors signal in concert to promote selection is key to un-
derstanding how positive selection occurs (i.e., increased prolifera-
tion and/or decreased cell death), as well as how higher affinity cells 
are favored in this process.
10 | C-­MYC UPREGULATION AS A SIGNAL 
OF POSITIVE SELECTION
A key insight into how positive selection is orchestrated was the un-
derstanding that c-­Myc induction was likely linked to, and a sign of, 
successful positive selection.106 While c-­Myc is only expressed by a 
small minority of GCBC, it was shown that lack of c-­Myc prevented 
GC formation while inducible deletion or antagonism ablated exist-
ing GCs.106,107 Moreover, c-­Myc+ cells were mainly in the LZ and 
acute induction of strong T-­cell help turned on c-­Myc transcription 
in LZ cells, though the fraction of responding cells was not ascer-
tained in this experiment.106,107 Interestingly, GCBC that expressed 
a c-­Myc reporter had an enrichment of affinity-­enhancing somatic 
mutations in their V regions, linking c-­Myc expression with fitness in 
the GC.106 In subsequent work, Ersching et al108 further connected 
positive selection—dependent on CD40—to mTORC1 signaling that 
led to increased cell size, generation of p-­S6, and migration to the 
DZ; somewhat surprisingly mTORC1 signaling was not required for 
proliferation, though.


--- Page 6 ---
54  |    
SHLOMCHIK et al.
11 | SIGNAL REWIRING IN THE GC THAT 
TUNES FOR POSITIVE SELECTION
The work of Victora, using the experimental technique of directing 
strong T-­cell help to GCBC,58,106,108 as well as other studies99,109 
clearly established a key role for T cell-­derived signals in mediating 
GCBC positive selection. In addition, the evidence described above 
suggested that BCR signals may not contribute to positive selection 
per se. What remained unaddressed was how GCBC interpret T cell-­
derived signals, in particular CD40L and IL-­21.
To address this, we first looked at whether CD40 signals were 
reprogrammed in GCBC. Indeed, we found that in GCBC, compared 
to NBC, PI3K signals were markedly attenuated following CD40 li-
gation, whereas NFκB signals were largely intact.72 This finding cre-
ated a conundrum, in that PI3K signals are required to activate AKT, 
which in turn is needed to phosphorylate and inactivate FOXO1.110-
112 As neither BCR nor CD40 signals seemed to engage the PI3K 
pathway, we could not understand how FOXO1 could be regulated 
in the GC. Two other groups had already shown key roles for PI3K 
signals and FOXO1 in maintaining the DZ; when FOXO1 is deleted 
or when PI3K signaling is constitutively turned on (which leads to 
phosphorylation and nuclear exit of FOXO1), the DZ collapses.112,113 
Consistent with this, FOXO1 was shown to be required for DZ main-
tenance and in the T cell-­induced LZ to DZ transition.114 Notably, in 
other cell types, FOXO1 is a well-­characterized suppressor of c-­Myc 
expression,115 which suggested a potential link between FOXO1 in-
activation and c-­Myc upregulation in positive selection.
The realization that we had not identified a path from either BCR 
or CD40 to PI3K/AKT-­dependent FOXO1 phosphorylation caused 
us to reexamine BCR signaling in the GC, using a more sensitive 
phosphoflow protocol that we had developed. Indeed, we were able 
to detect a small but significant transient pulse of p-­Syk immediately 
following BCR ligation of GCBC; it was substantially smaller and de-
cayed more rapidly than that generated in NBC.72 Most importantly, 
by directly examining FOXO1 we found strikingly efficient and 
rapid generation of p-­FOXO1 following BCR ligation in GCBC. As 
expected, this led to nuclear exit of FOXO1 within a few minutes of 
BCR ligation in both GCBC and NBC. These data are consistent with 
the results of Mueller et al97 showing Nur77-­dependent GFP ex-
pression in some LZ GCBC. Interestingly, other signals downstream 
of AKT and the mTORC1 complex, such as generation of p-­S6, re-
mained highly attenuated in GCBC vs NBC.72
Since c-­Myc transcription is typically repressed by FOXO1115 yet 
induced by NFκB,116,117 and we found that BCR—but not CD40—in-
activates FOXO1, whereas CD40—but not BCR—induces NFκB, we 
hypothesized that only via signals through both receptors could c-­
Myc be induced. Indeed, experiments showed this to be the case 
both in vitro and in vivo in GCBC, while either BCR or CD40 signals 
were sufficient to induce c-­Myc expression in NBC. Through these 
studies we could link two Ag-­driven signals to the key positive se-
lection checkpoint of c-­Myc upregulation. Notably, Ersching et al108 
have connected positive selection to activation of m-­TORC1 and 
subsequent generation of p-­S6 (a standard readout), and consistent 
with this we also observed late induction of p-­S6 upon delivery of a 
dual BCR/CD40 signal. The signals, when delivered in vivo, caused 
modulation of GC zonal surface marker expression and of cell lo-
cation as predicted by the overall model. We proposed that by re-
quiring both productive T-­cell interactions (via CD40 ligation) and 
direct Ag signals, GCBC signal wiring is optimized to select for higher 
affinity.72
We have discussed above how a higher affinity BCR could de-
termine an increased likelihood of getting adequate T cell-­derived 
signals, thereby promoting T-­B “entanglement” to prolong and en-
hance the signal to the T cell, resulting in a positive feedback loop. 
Indeed, theoretical considerations suggest that such positive feed-
back is necessary to enhance affinity selection.118 While the affinity-­
dependence of the strength or quality of this signal for the B cell has 
not been investigated directly, it is reasonable to think that higher 
affinity cells will get a stronger signal with possibly more induction 
of c-­Myc as a consequence. Both antibody staining and a c-­Myc-­GFP 
reporter have revealed a relatively broad distribution of c-­Myc levels 
in the GCBC that do express the protein, consistent with a diversity 
in strength of “positive selection” encounters in vivo.106,107 This area 
warrants further experimentation.
Cells that are positively selected also appear to avoid apopto-
sis, suggesting that the signaling mechanisms should induce anti-­
apoptotic mechanisms.36,42 Indeed, older literature connects a 
combination of BCR and CD40 signals with induction of bcl-­2 family 
members, though there was disagreement as to which bcl-­2 family 
member was critical.119-121 Exactly how expression of anti-­apoptotic 
proteins is controlled by key signals to GCBC is not clear.
There are also observations that link positive selection with 
an increased probability to enter cell cycle and/or to continue cell 
cycle. While mTORC1 induction led to an increase in GCBC cell 
size and an anabolic state, it was not strictly required for actual 
cell cycle progression.108 Still, positive selection seemed at the 
least to prepare cells and enable cell cycling. c-­Myc expression 
is linked with entry into the cell cycle and in non-­GCBC the ex-
tent of induction of c-­Myc is highly correlated with the number 
of cell divisions that a cell can subsequently undergo, with divi-
sion stopping as c-­Myc levels decay.122 It is thus tempting to sug-
gest that in GCBC the extent of c-­Myc induction is proportional 
in an analog way to the strength of combined T cell-­derived (e.g., 
CD40) and BCR-­derived signals that in turn are proportional to the 
potential for multiple rounds of division after the selection step. 
Commensurate with this notion are data from Gitlin et al48,123 link-
ing the extent of positive selection via T cell-­derived signals with 
a shortened S-­phase and more cell division in the DZ, though how 
S-­phase duration might be controlled by c-­Myc remains to be de-
termined. This is unlikely to be the only mechanism regulating pos-
itive selection, because too many divisions without selection will 
not allow for R/S enrichment and would result in many cells with 
loss of affinity subsequent to having had an affinity-­improving 
mutation.54,124,125
To reconcile and unify these observations, we present a “hy-
brid model” (Figure 1) in which BCR signals alone promotes initial 


--- Page 7 ---
    |  55
SHLOMCHIK et al.
migration of DZ GCBC and “licenses” the GCBC to remain in the 
LZ.72 We propose that BCR signals also induce or sustain anti-­
apoptotic factors. This in turn increases the likelihood of the par-
tially selected GCBC to obtain a complementary signal via T cells 
(via CD40 and cytokine signaling). Consistent with this element of 
our model, Mayer et al36 showed that BCR signaling in GCBC, as 
revealed by Nur77-­GFP expression, was more frequent than Myc 
expression; Nur77-­GFP-­expressing cells were partly protected 
from apoptosis, while Myc-­expressing cells were more fully pro-
tected. Also consistent with a role for BCR signals providing an 
anti-­apoptotic effect is the slow loss of GCBC (about twofold in 
2-­3 days) after inducible Syk deletion in GCBC, which had abro-
gated BCR signals.72 Successful T cell-­mediated signal delivery in 
the LZ—exemplified by CD40 ligation in our work72 or DEC205 
Ab-­mediated recruitment of comprehensive TFH help in the work 
of Victora et al58—would then lead to completion of a positive se-
lection cycle, with induction of an anabolic state along with DZ 
transition, followed by proliferation in proportion to the amount 
of c-­Myc induced.
12 | CELL-­INTRINSIC VS COMPETITIVE 
SELECTION
Affinity selection can be considered either cell-­intrinsic or cell-­
extrinsic; in vivo there could be a combination of both types of 
selection. Affinity intrinsic selection would occur when a cell with 
lower affinity responds less optimally compared to a higher af-
finity cell, regardless of whether there is competition from other 
clonotypes or even when Ag is not limiting; such responses would 
be hard-­wired differential read-­outs of affinity. That cell-­intrinsic 
selection exists is well-­known and has been the topic of much of 
this review to this point. Cell-­extrinsic forces are implicated when 
the response of a given cell is conditioned by the presence of 
more highly fit competitors. Cell-­extrinsic forces could be passive, 
for example, by causing Ag clearance that in turn engages cell-­
intrinsic selection against cells with lower affinity. Alternatively, 
such forces might be active, for example, by altering the milieu or 
even secreting inhibitory substances that tend to suppress less 
fit cells.
FI G U R E 1 Hybrid model of germinal center B cell (GCBC) selection. Successful competition for antigen binding of dark zone GCBCs 
which are of sufficient affinity results in the generation of p-FOXO1 through B-­cell receptor (BCR)-­mediated PI3K/Akt signaling (A) which 
promotes initial migration of these cells and “licenses” them to remain in the LZ. Additionally, BCR signaling may induce anti-­apoptotic 
factors (B) which allow more time for the partly selected GCBCs to productively interact with cognate TFH cells. Upon such interaction, 
BCR and CD40 signaling synergistically lead to the expression of c-­Myc and the activation of the mTORC1 pathway which induces the 
phosphorylation of S6, therefore fully engaging the process of positive selection (C). Positively selected LZ GCBCs migrate toward the DZ 
and their induced mTORC1-­driven anabolic state readies them for intensive proliferation, which coincides with the acquisition of additional 
mutations catalyzed by AID. As c-­Myc protein levels are diluted out with each cell division (D) DZ GCBCs need to be successful in binding to 
antigen in order to undergo another cycle of selection. Proliferating DZ GCBCs that fail to bind to antigen due to mutation-­mediated reduced 
BCR affinity or function will undergo apoptosis


--- Page 8 ---
56  |    
SHLOMCHIK et al.
In an early investigation of this issue, we demonstrated in 2002 
that very low affinity anti-­NP B cells that normally would never be 
found in a polyclonal GC reaction do in fact enter the GC when 
rendered the dominant clonotype by virtue of a BCR transgene.126 
These data suggested that in the absence of competition, this low 
affinity clonotype could perform better, evidence for cell-­extrinsic 
forces in the GC response and/or the events leading up to it. 
However, these responses were much smaller than those elicited in 
mice with a comparable BCR transgene that encoded higher affinity 
for the same haptenic Ag (a germline VDJ that would be common 
in the primary response), providing evidence for cell-­intrinsic lower 
fitness even in the absence of competition. We subsequently found 
that even very small numbers of medium affinity B cells would sup-
press vast excesses of low affinity B cells, preventing them from 
ever forming a GC response, which provides evidence of cell-­
extrinsic competition (unpublished observations). Nussenzweig and 
colleagues set up a system similar to ours, by inserting high-­affinity-­ 
(higher than germline) and low-­affinity-­encoding VDJs into the en-
dogenous IgH locus, where the constructs could undergo mutation 
(whereas in our case the non-­mutating ectopic Tg served to fix the 
low or medium affinity in place). Somewhat in contrast to our re-
sults, they found that in the absence of competition both low-­ and 
high-­affinity BCRs performed equally well, whereas they directly 
demonstrated the superiority of the high-­affinity cells when placed 
in competition.30 In retrospect, the failure to observe cell-­intrinsic 
defects may have been due to the ability of the site-­directed BCR 
transgene to undergo affinity-­improving mutations that compen-
sated for its initial low affinity.
It has also been suggested that Ab-­mediated clearance of Ag can be 
a driver of competition, and this would seem undoubtedly to be true.127 
The large GCs observed in mice lacking secreted Ab72,80 could in part 
result from lack of overall Ab-­mediated Ag clearance. However, whether 
Ab can mediate inter-­ or intra-­clonal competition within individual GCs 
seems questionable, as GCBC do not secrete Ig; the Ig that is made early 
comes mainly if not exclusively from extrafollicular (EF) plasmablasts, 
that are generally of very low affinity and thus not likely to promote 
much competition with higher affinity GCBC.128,129 In any case, it seems 
unlikely that Ab per se would mediate intra-GC competition.
Another possible vector for intra-­GC competition could be phys-
ical and direct competition for TFH interactions. This seems plausible, 
as TFH are limiting in the GC.6,49 However, the great majority of TFH 
interactions with GCBC seem to be quite short,34,99,130 seemingly 
limiting the potential of a high affinity GCBC to sequester a TFH from 
a lower affinity cell.
13 | WHAT IS THE FATE OF CELLS 
THAT DO NOT GET POSITIVE SELECTION 
SIGNALS?
This is a difficult question to answer directly by experiment, com-
pared to tracking the fates of cells that in fact do (via experimen-
tal means) get such signals. Differentiation is one option, as we will 
discuss below. Death vs failure to proliferate are the other two po-
tential outcomes, and these are not mutually exclusive. Using mice 
that have either fixed higher or lower affinity for the same hapten, 
NP, we measured both proliferation and death rates among Ag-­
specific GCBC. Somewhat surprisingly, GCBC had roughly similar 
rates of proliferation, regardless of affinity, while the fraction of 
GCBC undergoing cell death, as measured by the viable apopto-
sis dye zVAD-­fmk-­FITC, was ~3 times greater in the lower affinity 
cells.42 This led us to conclude that differential protection from cell 
death was a major mechanism of selection. We presented a detailed 
mathematical model to account for GC turnover in the normal and 
low affinity situation. However, it must be cautioned that this was in 
a noncompetitive situation and may have only measured one dimen-
sion of selection.
Mayer et al36 recently revisited the issue that we had addressed, 
using both an Ab to activated Caspase3 as well as a novel reporter 
mouse. They found similar, or perhaps slightly lower rates of apop-
tosis, as our prior study,42 as well as similar rates of labeling with 
a thymidine analog to measure division. They also confirmed ear-
lier work131 showing that AID-­negative GCBC had somewhat lower 
but still substantial rates of apoptosis (about 65% of WT overall in 
Peyer's patches). Importantly, they found that apoptosis was more 
frequent in phenotypically DZ GCBC and that this apoptosis was 
largely AID-­dependent. Sequencing of V regions from apoptotic cells 
demonstrated that a large fraction—though far from all—contained 
stop codons or out-­of-­frame nucleotide insertions. Hence, they con-
cluded that the DZ was the site of death of cells that had recently 
received inactivating mutations via AID. Though not directly ana-
lyzed, it seems likely that other dying cells in the DZ had missense 
mutations in relatively invariant residues of V region framework re-
gions; it is well-­known that these are also selected against resulting 
in an overall loss of about 50% of R mutations in these regions, and 
a replacement:silent mutation ratio of about 1.5. Indeed, Mayer et al 
nicely showed that many of the Ig that they reconstituted from sin-
gle apoptotic DZ cells were expressed, yet unstable, consistent with 
the presence of mutations in framework regions that disturbed Ig 
V region fundamental structure. Their work also showed that only 
LZ GCBC that reported c-­Myc expression, and not those reporting 
only BCR signaling (as indicated by a Nur77-­GFP reporter), were pro-
tected from apoptosis. This is consistent with apoptosis also being 
a fate of cells that failed positive selection, again as suggested by 
other reports and by mathematical models.42,54
14 | THE GC IS AN IMPERFECT SELECTION 
ENGINE AND IS ALSO DESIGNED TO 
GENERATE DIVERSITY
An issue less-­often discussed, but of great biological and concep-
tual significance, is the inherent variability of the GC response. 
This can be looked at in terms of the variant results across differ-
ent GCs responding in the same animal as well as within individual 
GCs.25,28,29,40,124,132 While affinity maturation is often discussed as 


--- Page 9 ---
    |  57
SHLOMCHIK et al.
the sole purpose of the GC, in fact generation of inter-­ and intra-­
clonal diversity also occurs40 and is likely to be quite important, 
particularly for defense against recurrent or chronic pathogens that 
themselves undergo high rates of variation.133-135 Elegant work by 
Tas et al29 has shown directly that individual GC are seeded by likely 
hundreds of cells, are only sometimes oligoclonal, and do not all con-
tain high-­affinity clones. This was a result predicted by modeling ap-
proaches, which demonstrated how often clones tend to fail under 
the weight of somatic hypermutation and how pathways to high 
affinity are sometimes quite unlikely, leading to affinity maturation 
only some of the time even under optimal conditions.54,124 Similarly, 
Kuraoka et al136 demonstrated, using complex Ags that are more 
physiologic than haptens, that concurrent with affinity maturation is 
wide variation in affinity of GCBC, as well as a large fraction of GCBC 
that do not demonstrably bind Ag to which they were likely originally 
elicited. These results suggest that some low affinity mutants can 
survive in GC for extended periods.
While we tend to conceptualize GC in a monolithic way, with LZ-­
specific or DZ-­specific only functions, an absolute need for Ag to be 
harvested from FDC, etc., in fact there is tremendous variation and 
flexibility in GC function and thus likely multiple pathways toward 
different outcomes. This more flexible view tends to mesh with the 
notion that GCs are designed to create diverse outcomes, of which 
affinity maturation is just one, and which includes the generation 
of a diverse set of Ag-­binding clones that can anticipate future an-
tigenic variation by pathogens as well as create different types of 
long-­lived effectors.
15 | SIGNALS FOR DIFFERENTIATION IN 
THE GC
The GC is conventionally considered the exclusive source of MBC 
and LLPC. In reality, substantial work in the last 10 years has re-
vealed that a remarkable fraction of the MBC pool formed in re-
sponse to immunization in mice is actually independent of the GC, 
is often not isotype-­switched, and carries relatively few V region 
mutations.45,137-140 Nonetheless, many MBC are indeed formed in 
the GC and most evidence indicates that the vast majority, if not all, 
LLPC are also formed in the GC, at later time points.45 This raises 
the question of what signals and events promote GCBC differentia-
tion rather than continuation of GCBC phenotype, positive selec-
tion, and/or death. Beyond that, in a GCBC that is differentiating to 
a long-­lived progeny cell, what promotes an MBC vs a LLPC fate?
Using an in vivo pulse-­chase BrdU labeling approach, combined 
with V region sequencing and anti-­CD40L treatment at defined time 
points, we recently showed that MBC emerge before LLPC, with not 
much overlap between the two populations.45 These conclusions 
were subsequently confirmed by similar pulse tamoxifen treatment 
using a tamoxifen-­responsive Cre in GCBC.141 In addition, MBC that 
express PD-­L2 or both PD-­L2 and CD80, emerge at progressively 
later time points. This suggested that GCs evolve over time from a 
state early-­on that is more favorable to MBC formation to a state 
that is more favorable to LLPC differentiation. However, no specific 
molecular mechanism was revealed.
In the past 2 years, a few salient reports have emerged that ei-
ther identify key transcription factors that are regulated in the GC 
to MBC transition or demonstrate cell surface phenotypes that mark 
precursors of MBC within the GC. Kometani et al142 demonstrated 
that Bach2 expression in the GC predisposed GCBC to MBC differ-
entiation and that this was correlated with lower affinity of the BCR. 
They suggest that lack of T-­cell signals, as a result of lower BCR af-
finity, may promote MBC differentiation.
Qi and colleagues reported that IL9R+ GCBC were precursors 
for MBC and that IL-­9 helped drive this process,143 though this has 
been challenged by subsequent studies.144 Laidlaw et al145 described 
a population of EphB1+ GCBC that have downregulated Bcl6, S1PR2, 
and upregulated CD38 that they term GC Premem cells, as likely MBC 
precursors. These cells were found mostly at the periphery of the 
LZ. Suan et al146 identified a potentially similar population of CCR6+ 
cells in the LZ that were relatively quiescent, were enriched for low 
affinity (but had some higher affinity cells), and had characteristics 
of MBC. Taken together these data suggest that MBC arise from 
“nonselected” cells in the LZ and—either due to cause or effect—
are of lower affinity. This is consistent with the data that MBC arise 
earlier in the GC and have fewer V region mutations, both of which 
are associated with lower affinity.45,141 Nonetheless, most nonse-
lected cells are expected to die, rather than differentiate, given the 
relatively small numbers of MBC created in a response137,140,147-150; 
the signals that distinguish those cells undergoing MBC transition vs 
death remain undefined, again in a cause and effect sense.
Initial searches for PC-­precursors among GCBC focused on 
finding Blimp1+ cells, but failed to identify such cells convinc-
ingly, whereas Blimp1+ PC-­precursors could be found in peripheral 
blood.151-153 Recently, Krautler et al154 reported on a small pop-
ulation of Blimp1+ cells (~0.25% of GCBC) that also were CD38lo, 
like GCBC, and expressed genes upregulated in PCs. These cells 
tended to have higher affinity for Ag, and were denoted as puta-
tive PC-­precursors, although no precursor-­product experiment was 
performed to test this idea. Although an earlier report claimed that 
higher affinity GCBC were selected into the PC compartment, in a 
directed rather than correlative fashion,155,156 later work on an anal-
ogous interpretation of extrafollicular plasmablast selection revised 
that conclusion to indicate that higher affinity cells were selected 
for more expansion, rather than for differentiation.157 It seems likely 
that the same applies for the GC and that the association between 
higher affinity in the GC and the PC compartment is likely a cor-
relation that results from PC differentiating later in the GC reaction, 
when the average GCBC does have higher affinity.45 To be clear, this 
does not rule out that affinity does play some part in directing PC 
differentiation, but this has not been demonstrated in a cause-­effect 
fashion.
The GC appears to produce two waves of antibody forming cells 
(AFC), the first of which includes short-­lived plasmablasts that seed 
the spleen and may also seed the BM but not survive there for long 
periods.158 The second wave, as noted, occurs much later, and is the 


--- Page 10 ---
58  |    
SHLOMCHIK et al.
source of long-­lived non-­cycling PC that reside mainly in the BM.45 
It is possible and even likely that the signals that produce these two 
waves could be different, even if there are some similarities in the 
precursor and product cells. Recently, Zhang et al158 proposed that 
an early wave of GCBC may differentiate and exit as plasmablasts 
near the GC T cell zone border at the base of the DZ. Direct lineage 
tracing and quantitative observation of differentiation and exit at 
this site would bolster this intriguing new model.
Ise et al159 recently identified a population of Bcl6lo/IRF4hi GCBC 
with a LZ phenotype that have characteristics in common with new 
emigrant PB from the GC; they suggested that this population was 
induced by T-­cell help signals, particularly via CD40. However, this 
work also did not directly demonstrate a precursor-­product rela-
tionship between these LZ GCBC and plasmablasts generated from 
the GC, and so does not provide conclusive proof of the model. It 
is additionally hard to reconcile the models of Zhang et al. (with 
plasmablasts differentiating at the base of the DZ) with Ise et al (with 
plasmablasts differentiating from IRF4hi cells in the LZ). Clearly, while 
progress is being made, more work is needed to decipher the signals 
that lead to either MBC or PC differentiation of GCBC and to better 
verify the identity of any putative precursors of either population.
16 | THE NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF 
NEGATIVE SELECTION IN THE GC
One of the major conundrums of the GC reaction is how GCBC 
can simultaneously be selected for stronger binding to foreign Ag 
while at the same time selecting against anti-­self B cells. This arises 
because somatic mutations will inevitably cause autoreactivity, ei-
ther de novo or via augmentation of preexisting weak autoreactiv-
ity.43,160-162 Indeed, there is evidence that the GCBC compartment 
does contain autoreactivity and that some of these cells differenti-
ate into the MBC compartment.94,163 Hence, selection against au-
toreactive mutant BCRs in the GC is likely to be inefficient, at best.
We previously suggested a model that would explain the relative 
desensitization of BCR signals as a means to discriminate self and 
nonself in the GC95: positive selection in the GC begins only after a 
substantial effector response that generates Ab has occurred. Thus, 
available Ag is likely to be limiting in the GC, particularly when mu-
tation frequencies begin to rise (and hence the likelihood of autore-
activity also rises), near the end of the second week of the immune 
response. However, “self” is likely to be highly prevalent and highly 
cross-­linking, being expressed on multiple cell surfaces and without 
preexisting Ab. BCR desensitization in the GC allows for a certain 
quality of BCR signal in response to foreign Ag (e.g., that inactivates 
FOXO1) to be transduced, without causing a substantial NFκB (or 
other) signal.72 However, a very strong signal may override negative 
regulatory mechanisms, such as high phosphatase activity, in GCBC 
and lead to more complete BCR signaling. We proposed that this 
would be interpreted as a negative signal and potentially lead to 
GCBC apoptosis, much as such signals do in developing immature 
B cells. While this might not eliminate all anti-­self B cells, it would 
censor high-­affinity B cells that bind to cell surfaces or abundant 
self-­Ag, such as debris from dying cells that is formed by the con-
stant death of GCBC.
In support of this concept are a series of experiments performed 
in several labs in the mid-­1990s in which various forms of Ag were 
injected at very high concentration into mice with ongoing GC re-
actions.164-166 In each case, these injections caused rapid apoptosis 
of GCBC, mostly in the LZ, which was only partly rescued by bcl-­2 
overexpression. While in some cases this was interpreted as due to 
interaction with monomeric Ag, when tested directly polyvalent 
or higher affinity Ag was clearly more potent.167 In all cases stud-
ied, there would have been preexisting low affinity Ab that would 
have probably created ICs and increased the valency of the reac-
tion. These pioneering studies bear revisiting in light of what is now 
known about BCR signaling and FDCs in GCs.
Two, more recent, elegant studies have provided more support 
for the idea that strong cross-­linking by Ag is a negative signal in the 
GC. Brink and colleagues engineered a pseudo-­self Ag that would 
be bound by a responding B cell in the GC only if that B cell had 
a specific V region mutation.168 Indeed, as predicted by the model, 
self-­reactive mutants were selective censored in the GC even while 
anti-­nonself mutants were positively selected. By expressing the 
pseudo-­self Ag in different tissues they were able to infer that self-­
tolerance in the GC required local expression (B cells expression 
was sufficient). These data complemented related work in which a 
pseudo-­self Ag was expressed on FDC,169 here demonstrating that 
it could enforce negative selection within the B cell follicle as even 
self-­reactive NBC were either deleted or anergized. Presumably, this 
FDC-­based expression of a pseudo-­self Ag would mimic the situa-
tion where Ag is instead bound onto the FDC surface within an IC. 
This fits with the view, argued above, that Ag deposits on FDC are 
likely counterregulatory rather than stimulatory.
17 | RECENT PROGRESS AND FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS
In this article, we have detailed how the last 6 years have seen sub-
stantial progress in our understanding of the fundamental processes 
that govern GC function. While positive selection of higher affinity B 
cells has long been appreciated, new insights have revealed key tran-
scription factors (e.g., c-­Myc and FOXO1) that underpin the process, 
as well as the signals that link BCR and T cell-­derived signals to their 
expression. These signals are rewired in the GC, and the mechanisms 
behind this are the subject of ongoing work. In addition, the micro-
anatomic locations where positive selection occurs and how cells 
migrate in response to selecting signals in the GC have been eluci-
dated. Our understanding of how proliferation and cell death result 
from either positive selection signals, failure of positive selection, or 
negative selection (i.e., “self-­reactivity”) has also advanced.
Because of the very small numbers of long-­lived MBC and LLPC 
that are generated over the life of a GC compared to the total num-
ber of GCBC, it has been notoriously difficult to identify the putative 


--- Page 11 ---
    |  59
SHLOMCHIK et al.
precursors of such long-­lived progeny within the GC, as well as to dis-
cern the signals that induce differentiation. With respect to MBC, we 
have seen advances in determining the timing of MBC formation, po-
tential precursors within the GC, signals that lead to MBC induction, 
transcription factor regulation associated with the transition from 
GCBC to MBC, and how alteration of surface receptors may lead to 
GC exit. There has been less insight into LLPC formation, but again 
there has been progress that parallels that seen for MBC. Consensus 
on some of these issues is still pending, and more work is needed.
At the same time many open and exciting questions remain 
for the field to tackle. We would like a more full picture of how 
GCBC integrate Ag and T-­cell signals, including cytokine sig-
nals as well as cues from stromal cells and molecules such as 
integrins. This should extend from the GCBC-­specific expression 
of surface receptors, to their remodeled cytoplasmic signaling 
networks, to the epigenetic landscape in GCBC. The goal is to 
understand how these GCBC-­specific alterations then condition 
the response to environmental cues that ultimately yield results 
such as survival, proliferation, and differentiation. A central 
question is how selection is so efficient, given all of the seem-
ingly random events that underlie it, starting with the rather 
promiscuous effects of AID in creating the substrate for V re-
gion diversity. Certain results suggest that more fit clones may 
dominantly suppress less fit clones in the same GC, but this has 
not been directly proven. In addition, as noted, there are still 
many open questions about how MBC and PC differentiation are 
induced; in particular direct evidence is lacking for precursor-­
product relationships that have been proposed. Finally, all of the 
recent and rapid ongoing progress can be integrated into more 
accurate and detailed mathematical models that integrate multi-
ple aspects of GC development, a quest that is being pursued by 
multiple groups.42,54,125,170-172 These can be highly useful in inte-
grating diverse sets of data, highlighting areas that need further 
clarification, and providing insight into a complex and dynamic 
system that in many respects still remains a mystery.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank our laboratory colleagues for many useful discussions 
and Danny Wikenheiser and Rebecca Elsner for critical reading 
of the manuscript. This study was supported by NIH grants 1R01 
AI105018-­05 and R01 AI043603-­18 to MJS.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
ORCID
Mark J. Shlomchik 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2152-0959 
Wei Luo 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2826-1723
Florian Weisel 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8679-9241    
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Klein U, Tu Y, Stolovitzky GA, et  al. Transcriptional analysis 
of the B cell germinal center reaction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2003;100(5):2639‐2644.
	
2.	 Velichutina I, Shaknovich R, Geng H, et al. EZH2-­mediated epigen-
etic silencing in germinal center B cells contributes to proliferation 
and lymphomagenesis. Blood. 2010;116(24):5247‐5255.
	
3.	 Hatzi K, Jiang Y, Huang C, et al. A hybrid mechanism of action for 
BCL6 in B cells defined by formation of functionally distinct com-
plexes at enhancers and promoters. Cell Rep. 2013;4(3):578‐588.
	
4.	 Ye BH, Cattoretti G, Shen Q, et al. The BCL-­6 proto-­oncogene con-
trols germinal-­centre formation and Th2-­ type inflammation. Nat 
Genet. 1997;16(2):161‐170.
	
5.	 Nurieva RI, Chung Y, Hwang D, et  al. Generation of T follicular 
helper cells is mediated by interleukin-­21 but independent of T 
helper 1, 2, or 17 cell lineages. Immunity. 2008;29(1):138‐149.
	
6.	 Crotty S. Follicular helper CD4 T cells (TFH). Annu Rev Immunol. 
2011;29:621‐663.
	
7.	 Weber JP, Fuhrmann F, Hutloff A. T-­follicular helper cells survive 
as long-­term memory cells. Eur J Immunol. 2012;42(8):1981‐1988.
	
8.	 Hale JS, Youngblood B, Latner DR, et al. Distinct memory CD4 +  
T cells with commitment to T follicular helper-­ and T helper 1-­
cell lineages are generated after acute viral infection. Immunity. 
2013;38(4):805‐817.
	
9.	 Ise W, Inoue T, McLachlan JB, et al. Memory B cells contribute to 
rapid Bcl6 expression by memory follicular helper T cells. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2014;111(32):11792‐11797.
	 10.	 Chung Y, Tanaka S, Chu F, et al. Follicular regulatory T cells ex-
pressing Foxp3 and Bcl-­6 suppress germinal center reactions. Nat 
Med. 2011;17(8):983‐988.
	 11.	 Linterman MA, Pierson W, Lee SK, et al. Foxp3(+) follicular reg-
ulatory T cells control the germinal center response. Nat Med. 
2011;17(8):975‐982.
	 12.	 Wollenberg I, Agua-Doce A, Hernandez A, et al. Regulation of the 
germinal center reaction by Foxp3 +  follicular regulatory T cells. J 
Immunol. 2011;187(9):4553‐4560.
	 13.	 MacLennan 
IC. 
Germinal 
centers. 
Annu 
Rev 
Immunol. 
1994;12:117‐139.
	 14.	 Klaus GGB, Humphrey JH, Kunkl A, Dongworth DW. The follicular 
dendritic cell: its role in antigen presentation in the generation of 
immunological memory. Immunol Rev. 1980;53:3‐28.
	 15.	 Chang JE, Turley SJ. Stromal infrastructure of the lymph node and 
coordination of immunity. Trends Immunol. 2015;36(1):30‐39.
	 16.	 Wang X, Rodda LB, Bannard O, Cyster JG. Integrin-­mediated interac-
tions between B cells and follicular dendritic cells influence germinal 
center B cell fitness. J Immunol. 2014;192(10):4601‐4609.
	 17.	 Cyster JG, Ansel KM, Reif K, et al. Follicular stromal cells and lym-
phocyte homing to follicles [In Process Citation]. Immunol Rev. 
2000;176:181‐193.
	 18.	 Cremasco V, Woodruff MC, Onder L, et al. B cell homeostasis and 
follicle confines are governed by fibroblastic reticular cells. Nat 
Immunol. 2014;15:973.
	 19.	 Reynes M, Aubert JP, Cohen JH, et al. Human follicular dendritic 
cells express CR1, CR2, and CR3 complement receptor antigens. J 
Immunol. 1985;135(4):2687‐2694.
	 20.	 Johnson GD, Hardie DL, Ling NR, MacLennan ICM. Human fol-
licular dendritic cells (FDC): a study with monoclonal antibodies 
(MoAb). Clin Exp Immunol. 1986;64:205‐213.
	 21.	 Kosco MH, Tew TG, Szakal AK. Antigenic phenotyping of isolated 
and in situ rodent follicular dendritic cells (FDC) with emphasis 
on the ultrastructural demonstration of Ia antigens. Anat Rec. 
1986;215:201‐213.
	 22.	 Kosco-Vilbois MH. Opinion: are follicular dendritic cells really 
good for nothing? Nat Rev Immunol. 2003;3(9):764‐769.


--- Page 12 ---
60  |    
SHLOMCHIK et al.
	 23.	 Bannard O, Horton Robert M, Allen Christopher DC, An J, Nagasawa 
T, Cyster Jason G. Germinal center centroblasts transition to a cen-
trocyte phenotype according to a timed program and depend on the 
dark zone for effective selection. Immunity. 2013;39(5):912‐924.
	 24.	 Rodda LB, Bannard O, Ludewig B, Nagasawa T, Cyster JG. 
Phenotypic and morphological properties of germinal cen-
ter dark zone Cxcl12-­expressing reticular cells. J Immunol. 
2015;195(10):4781‐4791.
	 25.	 Jacob J, Kelsoe G, Rajewsky K, Weiss U. Intraclonal gen-
eration of antibody mutants in germinal centres. Nature. 
1991;354(6352):389‐392.
	 26.	 William J, Euler C, Christensen S, Shlomchik MJ. Evolution of auto-
antibody responses via somatic hypermutation outside of germinal 
centers. Science. 2002;297:2066‐2070.
	 27.	 Di Niro R, Lee SJ, Vander Heiden JA, et al. Salmonella infection 
drives promiscuous B cell activation followed by extrafollicular af-
finity maturation. Immunity. 2015;43(1):120‐131.
	 28.	 Jacob J, Przylepa J, Miller C, Kelsoe G. In situ studies of the pri-
mary immune response to (4-­hydroxy-­3-­nitrophenyl)acetyl. III. 
The kinetics of V region mutation and selection in germinal center 
B cells. J Exp Med. 1993;178(4):1293‐1307.
	 29.	 Tas JM, Mesin L, Pasqual G, et al. Visualizing antibody affinity mat-
uration in germinal centers. Science. 2016;351(6277):1048‐1054.
	 30.	 Shih TA, Meffre E, Roederer M, Nussenzweig MC. Role of BCR af-
finity in T cell dependent antibody responses in vivo. Nat Immunol. 
2002;3(6):570‐575.
	 31.	 Schwickert TA, Victora GD, Fooksman DR, et al. A dynamic T cell-­
limited checkpoint regulates affinity-­dependent B cell entry into 
the germinal center. J Exp Med. 2011;208(6):1243‐1252.
	 32.	 Adachi Y, Onodera T, Yamada Y, et al. Distinct germinal center se-
lection at local sites shapes memory B cell response to viral es-
cape. J Exp Med. 2015;212(10):1709‐1723.
	 33.	 Zuccarino-Catania GV, Sadanand S, Weisel FJ, et  al. CD80 
and PD-­L2 define functionally distinct memory B cell sub-
sets that are independent of antibody isotype. Nat Immunol. 
2014;15(7):631‐637.
	 34.	 Allen CD, Okada T, Tang HL, Cyster JG. Imaging of germinal 
center selection events during affinity maturation. Science. 
2006;315:528‐531.
	 35.	 Hauser AE, Junt T, Mempel TR, et al. Definition of germinal-­center 
B cell migration in vivo reveals predominant intrazonal circulation 
patterns. Immunity. 2007;26(5):655‐667.
	 36.	 Mayer CT, Gazumyan A, Kara EE, et al. The microanatomic seg-
regation of selection by apoptosis in the germinal center. Science. 
2017;358(6360):eaao2602.
	 37.	 Muramatsu M, Sankaranand VS, Anant S, et al. Specific expression 
of activation-­induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a novel member of 
the RNA-­editing deaminase family in germinal center B cells. J Biol 
Chem. 1999;274(26):18470‐18476.
	 38.	 Cattoretti G, Büttner M, Shaknovich R, Kremmer E, Alobeid B, 
Niedobitek G. Nuclear and cytoplasmic AID in extrafollicular and 
germinal center B cells. Blood. 2006;107(10):3967‐3975.
	 39.	 Muramatsu M, Kinoshita K, Fagarasan S, Yamada S, Shinkai Y, 
Honjo T. Class switch recombination and hypermutation require 
activation-­induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a potential RNA ed-
iting enzyme. Cell. 2000;102(5):553‐563.
	 40.	 Clarke SH, Huppi K, Ruezinsky D, Staudt L, Gerhard W, Weigert 
M. Inter-­ and intraclonal diversity in the antibody response to in-
fluenza hemagglutinin. J Exp Med. 1985;161:687‐704.
	 41.	 McKean D, Huppi K, Bell M, Straudt L, Gerhard W, Weigert M. 
Generation of antibody diversity in the immune response of 
BALB/c mice to influenza virus hemagglutinin. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 1984;81:3180‐3184.
	 42.	 Anderson SM, Khalil A, Uduman M, et al. Taking advantage: high-­
affinity B cells in the germinal center have lower death rates, but 
similar rates of division, compared to low-­affinity cells. J Immunol. 
2009;183(11):7314‐7325.
	 43.	 Shlomchik MJ, Aucoin AH, Pisetsky DS, Weigert MG. Structure 
and function of anti-­DNA antibodies derived from a single autoim-
mune mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1987;84:9150‐9154.
	 44.	 Shlomchik MJ, Litwin S, Weigert M. The influence of somatic mu-
tation on clonal expansion. Prog Immunol Proc 7th Int Cong Immunol. 
1990;7:415‐423.
	 45.	 Weisel FJ, Zuccarino-Catania GV, Chikina M, Shlomchik MJ. A tem-
poral switch in the germinal center determines differential output 
of memory B and plasma cells. Immunity. 2016;44(1):116‐130.
	 46.	 MacLennan ICM. From the dark zone to the light. Curr Biol. 
1994;4:70‐72.
	 47.	 Camacho SA, Kosco-Vilbois MH, Berek C. The dynamic structure 
of the germinal center. Immunol Today. 1998;19(11):511‐514.
	 48.	 Gitlin AD, Shulman Z, Nussenzweig MC. Clonal selection in the 
germinal centre by regulated proliferation and hypermutation. 
Nature. 2014;509:637.
	 49.	 Wittenbrink N, Klein A, Weiser AA, Schuchhardt J, Or-Guil M. Is 
there a typical germinal center? A large-­scale immunohistologi-
cal study on the cellular composition of germinal centers during 
the hapten-­carrier-­driven primary immune response in mice. J 
Immunol. 2011;187(12):6185‐6196.
	 50.	 Kepler TB, Perelson AS. Cyclic re-­entry of germinal center B 
cells and the efficiency of affinity maturation. Immunol Today. 
1993;14:412‐414.
	 51.	 Kepler TB, Perelson AS. Somatic hypermutation in B cells: an opti-
mal control treatment. J Theor Biol. 1993;164(1):37‐64.
	 52.	 Radmacher MD, Kelsoe G, Kepler TB. Predicted and inferred 
waiting times for key mutations in the germinal centre reac-
tion: evidence for stochasticity in selection. Immunol Cell Biol. 
1998;76(4):373‐381.
	 53.	 Meyer-Hermann M. Does recycling in germinal centres exist? 
Immunol Cell Biol. 2002;80(1):30‐35.
	 54.	 Meyer-Hermann M, Mohr E, Pelletier N, Zhang Y, Victora GD, 
Toellner KM. A theory of germinal center B cell selection, division, 
and exit. Cell Rep. 2012;2(1):162‐174.
	 55.	 Hauser AE, Shlomchik MJ, Haberman AM. In vivo imaging stud-
ies shed light on germinal-­centre development. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2007;7(7):499‐504.
	 56.	 Allen CD, Okada T, Cyster JG. Germinal-­center organization and 
cellular dynamics. Immunity. 2007;27(2):190‐202.
	 57.	 Schwickert TA, Lindquist RL, Shakhar G, et  al. In vivo imaging 
of germinal centres reveals a dynamic open structure. Nature. 
2007;446(7131):83‐87.
	 58.	 Victora GD, Schwickert TA, Fooksman DR, et al. Germinal center 
dynamics revealed by multiphoton microscopy with a photoacti-
vatable fluorescent reporter. Cell. 2010;143(4):592‐605.
	 59.	 McDevitt HO, Askonas BA, Humphrey JH, Schecter I, Sela M. The 
localization of antigen in relation to specific antibody-­producing 
cells l. Use of a synthetic polypeptide [(T,G)-­A–L] labelled with io-
dine-­125. Immunology. 1966;11:337‐351.
	 60.	 Nossal GJV, Ada GL, Austin CM, Pye J. Antigens in immunity VIII. 
Localization of 125I-­labelled antigens in the secondary response. 
Immunology. 1965;9:349‐357.
	 61.	 Nossal GJV, Abbot A, Mitchell J, Lummus Z. Antigens in immunity. 
XV. Ultrastructural features of antigen capture in primary and sec-
ondary lymphoid follicles. J Exp Med. 1968;127:277.
	 62.	 Tew JG, Phipps RP, Madnel TE. The follicular dendritic cell: long-­
term antigen retention during immunity. Immunol Rev. 1980;53:29.
	 63.	 Schnizlein CT, Kosco MH, Szakal AK, Tew JG. Follicular den-
dritic cells in suspension: identification, enrichment, and ini-
tial characterization indicating immune complex trapping 
and lack of adherence and phagocytic activity. J Immunol. 
1985;134(3):1360‐1368.


--- Page 13 ---
    |  61
SHLOMCHIK et al.
	 64.	 Szakal A, Kosco M, Tew J. FDC-­iccosome mediated antigen deliv-
ery to germinal center B cells, antigen processing and presentation 
to T cells. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1988;237(197):197‐202.
	 65.	 Tew JG, Wu J, Qin D, Helm S, Burton GF, Szakal AK. Follicular den-
dritic cells and presentation of antigen and costimulatory signals to 
B cells. Immunol Rev. 1997;156:39‐52.
	 66.	 Qin D, Wu J, Carroll MC, Burton GF, Szakal AK, Tew JG. Evidence 
for an important interaction between a complement-­derived 
CD21 ligand on follicular dendritic cells and CD21 on B cells in the 
initiation of IgG responses. J Immunol. 1998;161(9):4549‐4554.
	 67.	 Qin D, Wu J, Vora KA, et al. Fcgamma receptor IIB on follicular 
dendritic cells regulates the B cell recall response [In Process 
Citation]. J Immunol. 2000;164(12):6268‐6275.
	 68.	 Gonzalez SF, Pitcher LA, Mempel T, Schuerpf F, Carroll MC. B 
cell acquisition of antigen in vivo. [Review] [46 refs]. Curr Opin 
Immunol. 2009;21(3):251‐257.
	 69.	 Roozendaal R, Mempel TR, Pitcher LA, et  al. Conduits mediate 
transport of low-­molecular-­weight antigen to lymph node follicles. 
Immunity. 2009;30(2):264‐276.
	 70.	 Pape KA, Catron DM, Itano AA, Jenkins MK. The humoral immune 
response is initiated in lymph nodes by B cells that acquire soluble 
antigen directly in the follicles. Immunity. 2007;26(4):491‐502.
	 71.	 Attanavanich K, Kearney JF. Marginal zone, but not follicular 
B cells, are potent activators of naive CD4 T cells. J Immunol. 
2004;172(2):803‐811.
	 72.	 Luo W, Weisel F, Shlomchik MJ. B cell receptor and CD40 signaling 
are rewired for synergistic induction of the c-­Myc transcription fac-
tor in germinal center B cells. Immunity. 2018;48(2):313‐326 e315.
	 73.	 You Y, Myers RC, Freeberg L, et al. Marginal zone B cells regu-
late antigen capture by marginal zone macrophages. J Immunol. 
2011;186:2172‐2181.
	 74.	 Phan TG, Grigorova I, Okada T, Cyster JG. Subcapsular encounter 
and complement-­dependent transport of immune complexes by 
lymph node B cells. Nat Immunol. 2007;8(9):992‐1000.
	 75.	 Cinamon G, Zachariah MA, Lam OM, Foss FW, Cyster JG. Follicular 
shuttling of marginal zone B cells facilitates antigen transport. Nat 
Immunol. 2008;9:54‐62.
	 76.	 Suzuki K, Grigorova I, Phan TG, Kelly LM, Cyster JG. Visualizing B 
cell capture of cognate antigen from follicular dendritic cells. J Exp 
Med. 2009;206(7):1485‐1493.
	 77.	 Gonzalez SF, Lukacs-Kornek V, Kuligowski MP, et al. Complement-­
dependent transport of antigen into B cell follicles. J Immunol. 
2010;185(5):2659‐2664.
	 78.	 Heesters BA, Myers RC, Carroll MC. Follicular dendritic cells: dy-
namic antigen libraries. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014;14(7):495‐504.
	 79.	 Batista FD, Harwood NE. The who, how and where of antigen pre-
sentation to B cells. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009;9(1):15‐27.
	 80.	 Hannum LG, Haberman AM, Anderson SM, Shlomchik MJ. 
Germinal center initiation, variable gene region hypermutation, 
and mutant B cell selection without detectable immune complexes 
on follicular dendritic cells. J Exp Med. 2000;192(7):931‐942.
	 81.	 Vora KA, Ravetch JV, Manser T. Amplified follicular immune 
complex deposition in mice lacking the Fc receptor g-­chain 
does not alter maturation of the B cell response. J Immunol. 
1997;159:2116‐2124.
	 82.	 Rao SP, Vora KA, Manser T. Differential expression of the in-
hibitory IgG Fc receptor FcgammaRIIB on germinal center cells: 
implications for selection of high-­affinity B cells. J Immunol. 
2002;169(4):1859‐1868.
	 83.	 Simmons WJ, Simms M, Chiarle R, et  al. Induction of germinal 
centers by MMTV encoded superantigen on B cells. Dev Immunol. 
2001;8(3–4):201‐211.
	 84.	 Ahearn JM, Fischer MB, Croix D, et al. Disruption of the Cr2 locus 
results in a reduction in B-­1a cells and in an impaired B cell re-
sponse to T-­dependent antigen. Immunity. 1996;4:251‐262.
	 85.	 Chen Z, Koralov SB, Kelsoe G. Regulation of humoral immune re-
sponses by CD21/CD35. Immunol Rev. 2000;176:194‐204.
	 86.	 Rossbacher J, Haberman AM, Neschen S, Khalil A, Shlomchik 
MJ. Antibody-­independent B cell-­intrinsic and -­extrinsic roles for 
CD21/35. Eur J Immunol. 2006;36(9):2384‐2393.
	 87.	 Rossbacher J, Shlomchik MJ. The B cell receptor itself can acti-
vate complement to provide the complement receptor 1/2 ligand 
required to enhance B cell immune responses in vivo. J Exp Med. 
2003;198(4):591‐602.
	 88.	 Ohishi K, Kanoh M, Shinomiya H, Hitsumoto Y, Utsumi S. 
Complement activation by cross-­linked B cell-­membrane IgM. J 
Immunol. 1995;154:3173‐3179.
	 89.	 Vinuesa CG, Linterman MA, Goodnow CC, Randall KL. T cells and 
follicular dendritic cells in germinal center B-­cell formation and se-
lection. Immunol Rev. 2010;237(1):72‐89.
	 90.	 Mesin L, Ersching J, Victora GD. Germinal center B cell dynamics. 
Immunity. 2016;45(3):471‐482.
	 91.	 Zhang Y, Garcia-Ibanez L, Toellner K-M. Regulation of germinal 
center B-­cell differentiation. Immunological Rev. 2016;270(1):8‐19.
	 92.	 Haberman AM, Shlomchik MJ. Reassessing the function of 
immune-­complex retention by follicular dendritic cells. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2003;3(9):757‐764.
	 93.	 Rahman ZS, Manser T. Failed up-­regulation of the inhibitory IgG Fc re-
ceptor Fc gamma RIIB on germinal center B cells in autoimmune-prone 
mice is not associated with deletion polymorphisms in the promoter 
region of the Fc gamma RIIB gene. J Immunol. 2005;175(3):1440‐1449.
	 94.	 Tiller T, Kofer J, Kreschel C, et al. Development of self-­reactive 
germinal center B cells and plasma cells in autoimmune Fc 
gammaRIIB-­deficient mice. J Exp Med. 2010;207(12):2767‐2778.
	 95.	 Khalil AM, Cambier JC, Shlomchik MJ. B cell receptor signal trans-
duction in the GC is short-­circuited by high phosphatase activity. 
Science. 2012;336(6085):1178‐1181.
	 96.	 He JS, Meyer-Hermann M, Deng XY, et al. The distinctive germinal 
center phase of IgE(+) B lymphocytes limits their contribution to the 
classical memory response. J Exp Med. 2013;210(12):2755‐2771.
	 97.	 Mueller J, Matloubian M, Zikherman J. Cutting edge: an in vivo 
reporter reveals active B cell receptor signaling in the germinal 
center. J Immunol. 2015;194(7):2993‐2997.
	 98.	 Nowosad CR, Spillane KM, Tolar P. Germinal center B cells recog-
nize antigen through a specialized immune synapse architecture. 
Nat Immunol. 2016;17(7):870‐877.
	 99.	 Liu D, Xu H, Shih C, et al. T-­B-­cell entanglement and ICOSL-­driven 
feed-­forward regulation of germinal centre reaction. Nature. 
2015;517(7533):214‐218.
	100.	 Shimoda M, Li T, Pihkala JP, Koni PA. Role of MHC class II on mem-
ory B cells in post-­germinal center B cell homeostasis and memory 
response. J Immunol. 2006;176(4):2122‐2133.
	101.	 Han S, Hathcock K, Zheng B, Kepler TB, Hodes R, Kelsoe G. Cellular 
interaction in germinal centers. Roles of CD40 ligand and B7-­2 in 
established germinal centers. J Immunol. 1995;155(2):556‐567.
	102.	 Zotos D, Coquet JM, Zhang Y, et al. IL-­21 regulates germinal cen-
ter B cell differentiation and proliferation through a B cell-­intrinsic 
mechanism. J Exp Med. 2010;207(2):365‐378.
	103.	 Chevrier S, Kratina T, Emslie D, Tarlinton DM, Corcoran LM. IL4 and 
IL21 cooperate to induce the high Bcl6 protein level required for 
germinal center formation. Immunol Cell Biol. 2017;95(10):925‐932.
	104.	 McGuire HM, Vogelzang A, Warren J, et  al. IL-­21 and IL-­4 col-
laborate to shape T-­dependent antibody responses. J Immunol. 
2015;195:5123‐5135.
	105.	 Zaretsky I, Atrakchi O, Mazor RD, et al. ICAMs support B cell inter-
actions with T follicular helper cells and promote clonal selection. 
J Exp Med. 2017;214(11):3435‐3448.
	106.	 Dominguez-Sola D, Victora GD, Ying CY, et al. The proto-­oncogene 
MYC is required for selection in the germinal center and cyclic re-
entry. Nat Immunol. 2012;13(11):1083‐1091.


--- Page 14 ---
62  |    
SHLOMCHIK et al.
	107.	 Calado DP, Sasaki Y, Godinho SA, et al. The cell-­cycle regulator 
c-­Myc is essential for the formation and maintenance of germinal 
centers. Nat Immunol. 2012;13(11):1092‐1100.
	108.	 Ersching J, Efeyan A, Mesin L, et al. Germinal center selection and 
affinity maturation require dynamic regulation of mTORC1 kinase. 
Immunity. 2017;46(6):1045‐1058 e1046.
	109.	 Shih C, Qi H. Intravital microscopy of T-­B cell interactions in germi-
nal centers. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1623:73‐85.
	110.	 Yusuf I, Zhu X, Kharas MG, Chen J, Fruman DA. Optimal B-­cell pro-
liferation requires phosphoinositide 3-­kinase-­dependent inactiva-
tion of FOXO transcription factors. Blood. 2004;104(3):784‐787.
	111.	 Jacinto E, Facchinetti V, Liu D, et al. SIN1/MIP1 maintains rictor-­
mTOR complex integrity and regulates Akt phosphorylation and 
substrate specificity. Cell. 2006;127(1):125‐137.
	112.	 Sander S, Chu VT, Yasuda T, et al. PI3 Kinase and FOXO1 tran-
scription factor activity differentially control B cells in the germi-
nal center light and dark zones. Immunity. 2015;43(6):1075‐1086.
	113.	 Dominguez-Sola D, Kung J, Holmes AB, et al. The FOXO1 tran-
scription factor instructs the germinal center dark zone program. 
Immunity. 2015;43(6):1064‐1074.
	114.	 Inoue T, Shinnakasu R, Ise W, Kawai C, Egawa T, Kurosaki 
T. The transcription factor Foxo1 controls germinal cen-
ter B cell proliferation in response to T cell help. J Exp Med. 
2017;214(4):1181‐1198.
	115.	 Wilhelm K, Happel K, Eelen G, et  al. FOXO1 couples metabolic 
activity and growth state in the vascular endothelium. Nature. 
2016;529(7585):216‐220.
	116.	 Duyao MP, Buckler AJ, Sonenshein GE. Interaction of an NF-­kappa 
B-­like factor with a site upstream of the c-­myc promoterProc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 1990;87(12):4727‐4731.
	117.	 La Rosa FA, Pierce JW, Sonenshein GE. Differential regulation 
of the c-­myc oncogene promoter by the NF-­kappa B rel family of 
transcription factors. Mol Cell Biol. 1994;14(2):1039‐1044.
	118.	 Wang P, Shih CM, Qi H, Lan YH. A stochastic model of the ger-
minal center integrating local antigen competition, individual-
istic T-­B interactions, and B cell receptor signaling. J Immunol. 
2016;197(4):1169‐1182.
	119.	 Liu YJ, Mason DY, Johnson GD, et al. Germinal center cells express 
bcl-­2 protein after activation by signals which prevent their entry 
into apoptosis. Eur J Immunol. 1991;21(8):1905‐1910.
	120.	 Tuscano JM, Druey KM, Riva A, Pena J, Thompson CB, Kehrl JH. 
Bcl-­x rather than Bcl-­2 mediates CD40-­dependent centrocyte sur-
vival in the germinal center. Blood. 1996;88:1359‐1364.
	121.	 Vikstrom I, Carotta S, Luthje K, et  al. Mcl-­1 is essential 
for germinal center formation and B cell memory. Science. 
2010;330(6007):1095‐1099.
	122.	 Heinzel S, Binh Giang T, Kan A, et al. A Myc-­dependent division 
timer complements a cell-­death timer to regulate T cell and B cell 
responses. Nat Immunol. 2017;18(1):96‐103.
	123.	 Gitlin AD, Mayer CT, Oliveira TY, et al. HUMORAL IMMUNITY. T 
cell help controls the speed of the cell cycle in germinal center B 
cells. Science. 2015;349(6248):643‐646.
	124.	 Shlomchik MJ, Watts P, Weigert MG, Litwin S. Clone: a Monte-­
Carlo computer simulation of B cell clonal expansion, somatic mu-
tation, and antigen-­driven selection. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 
1998;229:173‐197.
	125.	 Meyer-Hermann M. Overcoming the dichotomy of quantity and 
quality in antibody responses. J Immunol. 2014;193(11):5414‐5419.
	126.	 Dal Porto JM, Haberman AM, Kelsoe G, Shlomchik MJ. Very low 
affinity B cells form germinal centers, become memory B cells, and 
participate in secondary immune responses when higher affinity 
competition is reduced. J Exp Med. 2002;195(9):1215‐1221.
	127.	 Zhang Y, Meyer-Hermann M, George LA, et al. Germinal center 
B cells govern their own fate via antibody feedback. J Exp Med. 
2013;210(3):457‐464.
	128.	 Kelsoe G, Zheng B. Sites of B-­cell activation in vivo. [Review]. Curr 
Opin Immunol. 1993;5(3):418‐422.
	129.	 Dal Porto JM, Haberman AM, Shlomchik MJ, Kelsoe G. Antigen 
drives very low affinity B cells to become plasmacytes and enter 
germinal centers. J Immunol. 1998;161(10):5373‐5381.
	130.	 Qi H, Chen X, Chu C, Lu P, Xu H, Yan J. Follicular T-­helper cells: 
controlled localization and cellular interactions. Immunol Cell Biol. 
2014;92(1):28‐33.
	131.	 Boulianne B, Rojas OL, Haddad D, et al. AID and caspase 8 shape 
the germinal center response through apoptosis. J Immunol. 
2013;191(12):5840‐5847.
	132.	 Berek C, Berger A, Apel M. Maturation of the immune response in 
germinal centers. Cell. 1991;67(6):1121‐1129.
	133.	 Victora Gabriel D, Wilson Patrick C. Germinal center selection and 
the antibody response to influenza. Cell. 2015;163(3):545‐548.
	134.	 Wrammert J, Koutsonanos D, Li GM, et  al. Broadly cross-­
reactive antibodies dominate the human B cell response against 
2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus infection. J Exp Med. 
2011;208(1):181‐193.
	135.	 Wrammert J, Smith K, Miller J, et al. Rapid cloning of high-­affinity 
human monoclonal antibodies against influenza virus. Nature. 
2008;453(7195):667‐671.
	136.	 Kuraoka M, Schmidt AG, Nojima T, et  al. Complex antigens 
drive permissive clonal selection in germinal centers. Immunity. 
2016;44(3):542‐552.
	137.	 Inamine A, Takahashi Y, Baba N, et al. Two waves of memory B-­
cell generation in the primary immune response. Int Immunol. 
2005;17(5):581‐589.
	138.	 Takemori T, Kaji T, Takahashi Y, Shimoda M, Rajewsky K. 
Generation of memory B cells inside and outside germinal centers. 
Eur J Immunol. 2014;44(5):1258‐1264.
	139.	 Anderson SM, Tomayko MM, Ahuja A, Haberman AM, Shlomchik 
MJ. New markers for murine memory B cells that define mutated 
and unmutated subsets. J Exp Med. 2007;204(9):2103‐2114.
	140.	 Taylor JJ, Pape KA, Jenkins MK. A germinal center-­independent 
pathway generates unswitched memory B cells early in the pri-
mary response. J Exp Med. 2012;209(3):597‐606.
	141.	 Shinnakasu R, Inoue T, Kometani K, et al. Regulated selection of 
germinal-­center cells into the memory B cell compartment. Nat 
Immunol. 2016;17(7):861‐869.
	142.	 Kometani K, Nakagawa R, Shinnakasu R, et al. Repression of the tran-
scription factor Bach2 contributes to predisposition of IgG1 memory B 
cells toward plasma cell differentiation. Immunity. 2013;39(1):136‐147.
	143.	 Wang Y, Shi J, Yan J, et al. Germinal-­center development of mem-
ory B cells driven by IL-­9 from follicular helper T cells. Nat Immunol. 
2017;18(8):921‐930.
	144.	 Takatsuka S, Yamada H, Haniuda K, et al. IL-­9 receptor signaling in 
memory B cells regulates humoral recall responses. Nat Immunol. 
2018;19(9):1025‐1034.
	145.	 Laidlaw BJ, Schmidt TH, Green JA, Allen CD, Okada T, Cyster JG. The 
Eph-­related tyrosine kinase ligand Ephrin-­B1 marks germinal center 
and memory precursor B cells. J Exp Med. 2017;214(3):639‐649.
	146.	 Suan D, Krautler NJ, Maag JLV, et al. CCR6 defines memory B cell 
precursors in mouse and human germinal centers, revealing light-­
zone location and predominant low antigen affinity. Immunity. 
2017;47(6):1142‐1153e1144.
	147.	 Pape KA, Taylor JJ, Maul RW, Gearhart PJ, Jenkins MK. Different B 
cell populations mediate early and late memory during an endoge-
nous immune response. Science. 2011;331(6021):1203‐1207.
	148.	 Takahashi Y, Ohta H, Takemori T. Fas is required for clonal selec-
tion in germinal centers and the subsequent establishment of the 
memory B cell repertoire. Immunity. 2001;14(2):181‐192.
	149.	 Tomayko MM, Steinel NC, Anderson SM, Shlomchik MJ. Cutting 
edge: hierarchy of maturity of murine memory B cell subsets. J 
Immunol. 2010;185(12):7146‐7150.


--- Page 15 ---
    |  63
SHLOMCHIK et al.
	150.	 Weisel FJ, Appelt UK, Schneider AM, et al. Unique requirements 
for reactivation of virus-­specific memory B lymphocytes. J 
Immunol. 2010;185(7):4011‐4021.
	151.	 Angelin-Duclos C, Cattoretti G, Lin KI, Calame K. Commitment of 
B lymphocytes to a plasma cell fate is associated with Blimp-­1 ex-
pression in vivo. J Immunol. 2000;165(10):5462‐5471.
	152.	 Oracki SA, Walker JA, Hibbs ML, Corcoran LM, Tarlinton 
DM. Plasma cell development and survival. Immunol Rev. 
2010;237(1):140‐159.
	153.	 Blink EJ, Light A, Kallies A, Nutt SL, Hodgkin PD, Tarlinton DM. 
Early appearance of germinal center-­derived memory B cells 
and plasma cells in blood after primary immunization. J Exp Med. 
2005;201(4):545‐554.
	154.	 Kräutler NJ, Suan D, Butt D, et  al. Differentiation of ger-
minal center B cells into plasma cells is initiated by high-­
affinity antigen and completed by Tfh cells. J Exp Med. 
2017;214:1259‐1267.
	155.	 Paus D, Phan TG, Chan TD, Gardam S, Basten A, Brink R. Antigen 
recognition strength regulates the choice between extrafollicular 
plasma cell and germinal center B cell differentiation. J Exp Med. 
2006;203(4):1081‐1091.
	156.	 Phan TG, Paus D, Chan TD, et al. High affinity germinal center B 
cells are actively selected into the plasma cell compartment. J Exp 
Med. 2006;203(11):2419‐2424.
	157.	 Chan TD, Gatto D, Wood K, Camidge T, Basten A, Brink R. 
Antigen affinity controls rapid T-­dependent antibody produc-
tion by driving the expansion rather than the differentiation 
or extrafollicular migration of early plasmablasts. J Immunol. 
2009;183(5):3139‐3149.
	158.	 Zhang Y, Tech L, George LA, et al. Plasma cell output from germinal 
centers is regulated by signals from Tfh and stromal cells. J Exp 
Med. 2018;215(4):1227‐1243.
	159.	 Ise W, Fujii K, Shiroguchi K, et al. T follicular helper cell-­germinal 
center B cell interaction strength regulates entry into plasma cell or 
recycling germinal center cell fate. Immunity. 2018;48(4):702‐715 
e704.
	160.	 Diamond B, Scharff MD. Somatic mutation of the T15 heavy chain 
gives rise to an antibody with autoantibody specificity. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 1984;81:5841‐5844.
	161.	 Radic MZ, Mascelli MA, Erikson J, Shan H, Shlomchik M, Weigert 
M. Structural patterns in anti-­DNA antibodies from MRL/lpr mice. 
Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1989;54(Pt 2):933‐946.
	162.	 Radic MZ, Mackle J, Erikson J, Mol C, Anderson WF, Weigert M. 
Residues that mediate DNA binding of autoimmune antibodies. J 
Immunol. 1993;150(11):4966‐4967.
	163.	 Tiller T, Tsuiji M, Yurasov S, Velinzon K, Nussenzweig MC, 
Wardemann H. Autoreactivity in human IgG+ memory B cells. 
Immunity. 2007;26(2):205‐213.
	164.	 Han S, Zheng B, Dal PortoJ, Kelsoe G. In situ studies of the pri-
mary immune response to (4-­hydroxy-­3-­nitrophenyl)acetyl. IV. 
Affinity-­dependent, antigen-­driven B cell apoptosis in germinal 
centers as a mechanism for maintaining self-­tolerance. J Exp Med. 
1995;182(6):1635‐1644.
	165.	 Pulendran B, Kannourakis G, Nouri S, Smith KGC, Nossal GJV. 
Soluble-­antigen can cause enhanced apoptosis of germinal-­center 
B-­cells. Nature. 1995;375(6529):331‐334.
	166.	 Shokat KM, Goodnow CC. Antigen-­induced B-­cell death and 
elimination during germinal-­centre immune responses. Nature. 
1995;375(6529):334‐338.
	167.	 Silva M, Nguyen TH, Philbrook P, et al. Targeted elimination of im-
munodominant B cells drives the germinal center reaction toward 
subdominant epitopes. Cell Rep. 2017;21(13):3672‐3680.
	168.	 Chan TD, Wood K, Hermes JR, et  al. Elimination of germinal-­
center-­derived self-­reactive B cells is governed by the location and 
concentration of self-­antigen. Immunity. 2012;37(5):893‐904.
	169.	 Yau IW, Cato MH, Jellusova J, Hurtado de Mendoza T, Brink R, 
Rickert RC. Censoring of self-­reactive B cells by follicular dendritic 
cell-­displayed self-­antigen. J Immunol. 2013;191(3):1082‐1090.
	170.	 Singh H, Khan AA, Dinner AR. Gene regulatory networks in the 
immune system. Trends Immunol. 2014;35(5):211‐218.
	171.	 Childs LM, Baskerville EB, Cobey S. Trade-­offs in antibody rep-
ertoires to complex antigens. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 
2015;370(1676):20140245.
	172.	 Wittenbrink N, Weber TS, Klein A, et  al. Broad volume distri-
butions indicate nonsynchronized growth and suggest sud-
den collapses of germinal center B cell populations. J Immunol. 
2010;184:1339‐1347.
How to cite this article: Shlomchik MJ, Luo W, Weisel F. 
Linking signaling and selection in the germinal center. Immunol 
Rev. 2019;288:49–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/imr.12744
