--- Page 1 ---
Nucleasecolicinsandtheirimmunityproteins
Grigorios Papadakos, Justyna A. Wojdyla and Colin Kleanthous*
Department of Biology, University of York, Wentworth Way, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK
Abstract.
It is more than 80 years since Gratia first described ‘a remarkable antagonism
between two strains of Escherichia coli’. Shown subsequently to be due to the action of
proteins (or peptides) produced by one bacterium to kill closely related species with which it
might be cohabiting, such bacteriocins have since been shown to be commonplace in the
internecine warfare between bacteria. Bacteriocins have been studied primarily from the twin
perspectives of how they shape microbial communities and how they penetrate bacteria to kill
them. Here, we review the modes of action of a family of bacteriocins that cleave nucleic acid
substrates in E. coli, known collectively as nuclease colicins, and the specific immunity (inhibitor)
proteins that colicin-producing organisms make in order to avoid committing suicide. In a
process akin to targeting in mitochondria, nuclease colicins engage in a variety of cellular
associations in order to translocate their cytotoxic domains through the cell envelope to the
cytoplasm. As well as informing on the process itself, the study of nuclease colicin import has
also illuminated functional aspects of the host proteins they parasitize. We also review recent
studies where nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins have been used as model systems
for addressing fundamental problems in protein folding and protein–protein interactions, areas
of biophysics that are intimately linked to the role of colicins in bacterial competition and to
the import process itself.
1. Scope of the review
58
2. Structural biology of Cols and their Im proteins
59
3. Overview of Col import
63
4. Receptor binding and recruitment of OM translocator proteins
65
4.1. Receptor binding
65
4.2. Translocator recruitment and the mechanism of T-domain translocation to the periplasm
67
5. Recruitment of periplasmic proteins to form a translocon complex at the OM
69
5.1. ColE9
70
5.2. ColN
73
5.3. ColA
74
6. Col translocation across the OM and the role of the PMF
75
7. Col nuclease domain translocation across the IM and the role of proteolytic
processing
77
* Address for correspondence: Professor C. Kleanthous, Department of Biology, University of York,
Wentworth Way, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK. Tel.: +44-1904-328820; Fax: +44-1904-328825;
Email: colin.kleanthous@york.ac.uk
Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics 45, 1 (2012), pp. 57–103.
f Cambridge University Press 2011
57
doi:10.1017/S0033583511000114
Printed in the United States of America


--- Page 2 ---
8. Mechanism of action of enzymatic cytotoxic domain
79
8.1. DNase Cols
80
8.2. rRNase Cols
82
8.3. tRNase Cols
83
8.4. Peptidoglycan hydrolase Col
83
9. Protein–protein interaction studies of the Col endonuclease–Im protein
complex
84
9.1. Kinetic and thermodynamic analyses of Col DNase–Im protein association
84
9.2. A dual-recognition mechanism underpins binding specificity in Col DNase–Im protein
complexes
85
9.3. The cognate ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex
87
9.4. The non-cognate ColE9 DNase–Im2 complex
88
9.5. Evolution and design of Col DNase–Im protein complexes
90
10. Im protein folding mechanism and its link to function
93
10.1. The folding energy landscape of Im7
94
10.2. Folding intermediates in other Im proteins
96
11 Acknowledgments
96
12 References
96
1. Scope of the review
Colicins (Cols) are highly speciﬁc protein antibiotics released by Escherichia coli that target and kill
neighbouring E. coli during times of environmental stress as a means of reducing competition for
resources. Normally plasmid-encoded, Cols are members of the bacteriocin family of antimicro-
bials, which include both peptide and protein antibiotics that are widespread among Gram-
negative and Gram-positive bacteria. Long studied by microbial population ecologists in the
context of their impact on the population dynamics of co-existing bacterial populations (Gardner
et al. 2004; Kirkup & Riley, 2004; Riley, 1998), the mode of action of Cols has proven fertile
ground for bacteriologists since their discovery over 80 years ago. These studies have shown that
while Cols can kill cells by a variety of mechanisms these generally fall into two cytotoxic classes;
enzymatic Cols cleave either nucleic acid or peptidoglycan while pore-forming Cols depolarize
the cytoplasmic membrane. Extensive biochemical, structural and biophysical work has been
published for both classes. Given the number of studies on Cols, in comparison with bacter-
iocins that target other Gram-negative organisms such as Yersinia pestis or Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
it is not surprising that they are among the best understood of the protein bacteriocins and not
just from the perspective of their import across the cell envelope. Cols and their associated
immunity (Im) proteins, which are the small antidote proteins that protect producing cells from
the harmful cytotoxic eﬀects of the Col, are often used as models for addressing fundamental
questions in protein chemistry, particularly in the investigation of the protein-folding mechanism
and in the dissection, design and directed evolution of protein–protein interaction speciﬁcity.
The present review focuses on recent discoveries on enzymatic Cols and their Im proteins and
in particular nuclease Cols, which have been reviewed less in the literature than their pore-
forming counterparts (Anderluh & Lakey, 2008; Cascales et al. 2007; Iacovache et al. 2008; Ridley
et al. 2010; Zakharov et al. 2004b). As well as dealing with how these potent cytotoxins target and
58
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 3 ---
kill E. coli cells–the dogma in the ﬁeld being that one molecule is suﬃcient to kill a cell–we also
review some of the work in other areas of protein science where nuclease Cols and their Im
proteins have proven tractable model systems. Although not dealing explicitly with pore-forming
Cols, we make reference to work on these toxins where relevant to the wider question of how
Cols translocate cytotoxic domains across the Gram-negative outer membrane (OM) as this is
independent of cytotoxic activity. The reader is directed to the extensive review of Cascales et al.
(2007) for topics not covered by the present article.
2. Structural biology of Cols and their Im proteins
Col production is generally induced via the SOS pathway in E. coli in response to stress. The
toxin is then released to the extracellular environment through the action of a small bacteriocin-
release protein although the mechanism by which this happens is poorly understood. The mo-
lecular weights of Cols vary substantially, ranging from 40 to 80 kDa, yet despite their very
diﬀerent structures all Cols are constructed from the same basic modular design: an N-terminal
translocation (T) domain implicated in coordinating translocation across the OM, a central
receptor-binding (R) domain, which localizes the toxin to the cell surface, and a C-terminal
cytotoxic (C) domain, which is translocated across the OM and in the case of nuclease Cols also
through the inner membrane (IM). Interestingly, the same three-domain arrangement is seen in
proteins involved in the uptake of some ﬁlamentous bacteriophages into E. coli, to the extent that
phage/Col chimaeras retain cytotoxic activity suggesting that there are likely to be parallels
between the early stages of phage infection and Col translocation across the OM (Jakes et al.
1988).
In order to avoid suicide all Col-producing E. coli produce an Im protein (y10 kDa). In the
case of nuclease Cols, the immunity (Im) protein binds to the C-terminal cytotoxic domain and
neutralizes its activity in the host (Kleanthous & Walker, 2001). Hence, these toxins are released
to the environment as heterodimeric proteins necessitating removal of the Im protein during cell
entry (Section 6). In the case of Cols that act from within the conﬁnes of the periplasm, and
which are not active until they translocate into a cell, the Im protein is either localized to the IM
through a lipoyl tether (peptidoglycan-cleaving Col) or is an integral IM protein (pore-forming
Cols).
To-date, more than 20 Cols have been characterized (Table 1), with structural information for
many deposited in the protein data bank (PDB). Full-length structures have been published for
ColE3 (Soelaiman et al. 2001), ColIa (Wiener et al. 1997), ColB (Hilsenbeck et al. 2004), ColM
(Zeth et al. 2008) and ColS4 (Arnold et al. 2009) (Fig. 1). In many instances, however, these
structures lack electron density for part or all of the N-terminus of the toxin (e.g. the structure of
ColN; Vetter et al. 1998), with biophysical measurements (primarily nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), circular dichroism (CD) and ﬂuorescence spectroscopy) on several Cols (ColE9, ColN
and ColA) consistent with these regions being intrinsically unstructured in solution (Collins et al.
2002; Deprez et al. 2002; Hecht et al. 2009b; Raggett et al. 1998). The unstructured nature of Col
N-termini is important for translocation into E. coli because these regions invariably contain one
or more linear peptide signalling epitopes, which are destined to contact trans–periplasmic sys-
tems linked to the proton-motive force (PMF) across the IM (Sections 4 and 5). In addition to
full-length structures, there are also structures available for isolated Col domains, most often the
C-terminal cytotoxic pore-forming domain (e.g. ColA) or nucleases in complex with Im proteins
(e.g. ColD DNase bound to ImD).
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
59


--- Page 4 ---
Although the nomenclature of Cols is somewhat ad hoc some systematic naming is to be found
among this diverse group of proteins, most often reﬂecting the commonality of entry routes into
cells and/or cytotoxic activities. For example, Cols E2–E9, which all utilize the BtuB receptor
(Section 4), share a high degree of sequence identity in their Col translation domain (T-domain)
and Col receptor-binding domain (R-domain) (70–90%), and hence have the same mode of
Table 1. Table shows some of the major Cols that have been identiﬁed, their receptors and translocators,
where known and, references to structural information for the Col and/or its Im protein
Col
Primary
receptor
Translocator
Cytotoxicity
Structural information available for Col
and/or Im protein
Group A
ColA
BtuB
OmpF
Pore forming
Pore-forming domain (1COL)
ColE1
BtuB
TolC
Pore forming
Pore-forming domain (2I88)
ColE2, ColE7,
ColE8, ColE9
BtuB
OmpF
DNase
E2 R-domain in complex with BtuB (2YSU);
NMR structure of Im2 (2NO8); Im2 in
complex with E9 (2WPT); E7 T-domain
(2AXC); E7 DNase domain free (1M08), in
complex with Im7 (1MZ8) and with DNA
(1ZNS & 1PT3); Im7 crystal structure
(1UNK) and NMR (2K0D); NMR structure
of Im8 (1GXH and 1GXG); crystal (1EMV)
and NMR (2K5X) structure of E9
DNase–Im9 complex; E9 DNase alone
(1FSJ) and in complex with DNA (1V14 and
1V15); NMR structure of Im9 (1IMQ and
1IMP)
ColE3, ColE4,
ColE6
BtuB
OmpF
rRNAse
E3 R-domain in complex with BtuB (1UJW);
E3 full-length (1JCH)a; rRNase domain
(1E44) in complex with Im3, E3 rRNase
bound to 70S ribosome (2XFZ, 2XG0,
2XG1 and 2XG2), Im3 protein (3EIP)
ColE5
BtuB
OmpF
tRNase
tRNase domain alone (2A8K) and in complex
with Im5 (2FHZ)
ColK
Tsx
OmpF
Pore forming
N/a
ColN
OmpF
OmpF
Pore forming
Receptor-binding and pore-forming domains
(1A87)b
ColS4
OmpW
OmpF
Pore forming
Full-length Col (3FEW)c
ColU
OmpA
OmpF
Pore forming
N/a
Group B
Col5, Col10
Tsx
TolC
Pore forming
N/a
ColB
FepA
?
Pore forming
Full-length Col (1RH1)d
ColD
FepA
?
tRNase
tRNase domain in complex with Im protein
(1V74)
ColIa, ColIb
Cir
Cir
Pore forming
Full-length Col Ia (1CII)e; R-domain of Col Ia
in complex with Cir receptor (2HDI)
ColM
FhuA
?
Phosphatase
Structure of full-length Col (3DA4)f; Im
protein ImM (2XGL)
aColE3 structure lacks the N-terminal 83 residues which are disordered (Soelaiman et al. 2001).
bN-terminal 90 residues missing in the structure (Vetter et al. 1998). T-domain (residues 17–66) un-
structured, shown by CD, ﬂuorescence and NMR (Hecht et al. 2009a; Raggett et al. 1998).
cResidues 1–67 disordered in the structure (Arnold et al. 2009).
dResidues 1–10 and 29–43 disordered but TonB box (11–28) visible (Hilsenbeck et al. 2004).
eColIa structure missing residues 1–22 but TonB box (23–27) visible (Wiener et al. 1997).
fResidues 2–35 (including Ton B box 2–8) present but lacking deﬁned structured (Zeth et al. 2008).
60
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 5 ---
entry into bacteria, but share no sequence similarity in their cytotoxic domains unless members
of the same nuclease family. Interestingly, these Cols encompass the three diﬀerent nuclease
activities so far reported for Cols; deoxyribonucleases (DNases; ColE2, ColE7, ColE8 and
ColE9), ribosomal-speciﬁc ribonucleases (rRNases; ColE3, ColE4 and ColE6), and a tRNA-
speciﬁc ribonuclease (tRNase; ColE5). The structures of the diﬀerent nuclease classes are quite
distinct from each other implying that the entry routes of these Cols are insensitive to the toxic
payload being carried. Consequently, the conserved T- and R-domains of Cols E2–E9 can be
thought of as ‘targeting domains’ ensuring delivery of a variety of nucleases to the E. coli
cytoplasm.
While all Cols share a characteristic three-domain organization their structures can diﬀer
signiﬁcantly (Fig. 1). Some Cols adopt compact structures, such as Cols N, M and S4, while
others are extended, such as Cols B, E3 and Ia. The C-terminal cytotoxic domains are generally
small, globular domains, as in the bundle of a-helices in pore-forming Cols (built from two
central hydrophobic helices surrounded by eight amphipatic helices) or the mixed a/b structures
of nuclease Cols. The exception is Col M the cytotoxic domain of which accounts for more than
Colicin S4
Colicin M
Colicin Ia
Colicin E3
Colicin N
Colicin B
Fig. 1. Structures of Cols S4 (PDB ID: 3FEW), N (PDB ID: 1A87), Ia (PDB ID: 1CII), M (PDB ID:
3DA4), E3 in complex with Im3 (PDB ID: 1JCH) and B (PDB ID: 1RH1) are shown in ribbon rep-
resentation. Translocation (T-) domains are shown in red, receptor-binding (R-) domains in light and dark
blue and cytotoxic (C-) domains in green, with the Im protein Im3 shown in magenta. The loosely struc-
tured residues of the TonB box (residues 2–8) are shown for Col M.
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
61


--- Page 6 ---
half of molecule and is structurally similar to the open b-barrel of the Haemophilus inﬂuenzae Hir
autoreceptor (Meng et al. 2006). The structure of the central R-domain of Cols is particularly
diverse in both size and shape, reﬂecting very diﬀerent binding speciﬁcities for primary receptors.
Cols B, E3 and Ia have extended a-helical R-domains. The ColB R-domain consists of single
74 A˚ long a-helix, while the ColE3 R-domain is a coiled-coil of two a-helices. ColIa has two
long parallel a-helices separated by an additional small domain, formed by a two-stranded anti-
parallel b-sheet and three short a-helices. In the case of ColN, the R-domain consists of a
twisted, seven-stranded b-sheet wrapped around an a-helix that extends into the pore-forming
domain. The R-domain of ColM on the other hand contains six a-helices ﬁve of which surround
a long central helix, a3 (Zeth et al. 2008). The N-terminal T-domains of Cols are also structurally
diverse. They can be small and disordered, as in the case of ColM (35 residues) and ColN
(90 residues) or rather large with some unstructured regions, as in the case of Cols E3, B and Ia.
The ColIa T-domain consists of two y80 A˚ long antiparallel a-helices, that of ColE3 forms
a jellyroll structure composed of three b-sheets ﬂanked by two helical stretches while the
ColB T-domain is composed of 17 b-strands and two a-helices that is topologically similar to
ColE3. The structures for group A Cols ColE3 and ColN lack the ﬁrst y70–80 residues, con-
sistent with these regions being disordered (Section 4). In other Cols, the N-terminus either lacks
regular secondary structure (ColB and ColIa) or is largely unstructured (ColM) (Section 4).
The pore-forming Col S4 contains an unusual duplication of its R-domain (Pilsl et al. 1999).
ColS4 has a compact structure with four distinct domains: an N-terminal T-domain, two central
R-domains and a C-terminal pore-forming domain (Fig. 1). The ﬁrst 67 amino acids of the
T-domain are unstructured, the remainder consisting of a three-stranded b-sheet and short
a-helix. The structures and sequences of the two R-domains are very similar (root mean square
deviation (RMSD) <1 A˚ ), composed of a three-stranded b-sheet followed by three a-helices.
Mutational analysis has suggested that only one of the R-domains is necessary for cell-killing
(Arnold et al. 2009).
With the exception of ColM, enzymatic Cols form high-aﬃnity complexes with their cognate
Im proteins immediately after synthesis in the producing cell. Structures for a number of Im
proteins, both in their unbound forms (Im2, Im3, Im7, Im8, Im9 and ImM) and in complex with
Col catalytic domains (E7 DNase–Im7, E9 DNase–Im9, E3 rRNase–Im3, E5 tRNase–Im5 and
D tRNase–ImD) have been reported (Fig. 2). The structures provide detailed insight into the
mechanism of enzymatic Col inhibition by Im proteins (Section 9).
The ﬁrst structural information on Im protein–Col complexes was reported for the DNase
Cols E7 and E9 (Kleanthous et al. 1999; Ko et al. 1999). DNase Im proteins share y50%
sequence identity and adopt an antiparallel four-helix bundle fold, with a characteristic short
third helix. The ribosome-inactivating ColE3 Im protein Im3 adopts a four-stranded antiparallel
b-sheet fold with two a-helices packed against one side of the sheet. The exposed face of the
Im3 b-sheet interacts with an N-terminal a-helix and the ﬁrst two b-sheets of the rRNase (Carr
et al. 2000). Although the structure of the E3 rRNase–Im3 complex is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
DNase–Im complexes, the mode of inhibition is the same; the inhibitor docks at an exosite
adjacent to the active site that blocks substrate binding. The structure of the ColD Im protein
ImD consists of four tightly packed a-helices. In contrast to other nuclease–Im protein com-
plexes ImD inhibits nuclease activity by binding directly to the active site of ColD (Graille et al.
2004). A positively charged groove on the surface of ColD that encompasses the active site inter-
acts with a negatively charged patch on ImD, which mimics the backbone of the tRNA substrate.
The tRNase Col ColE5 and its Im protein, Im5, form a compact complex with a large interaction
62
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 7 ---
area, characterized by a high degree of shape- and charge-complementarity (Luna-Chavez et al.
2006). Im5 adopts a mixed a-/b-fold comprising a four-stranded b-sheet and three a-helices.
ColE5 and ColD have similar folds, but their RNA-binding sites as well as the location of their
active sites are diﬀerent. Even though the mechanism of inhibition of tRNase Cols by their Im
proteins is similar the structures of Im5 and ImD diﬀer signiﬁcantly. Finally, the structure of the
Im protein for ColM (Cmi or ImM) is composed of four a-helices and a four-stranded anti-
parallel b-sheet (Gerard et al. 2010). ImM resembles a cystatin-fold and contains a disulﬁde bond
between Cys31 and Cys107. Despite available structural information it remains unclear as to how
ImM inhibits the activity of ColM.
3. Overview of Col import
Cols translocate into E. coli by parasitizing a variety of membrane and periplasmic proteins in the
cell envelope all of which serve important functions in the bacterium. Initial localization at the
cell surface typically occurs through binding of the R-domain to an OM nutrient or vitamin
receptor although porins can also function as Col receptors (Table 1; Section 4). Receptor-bound
Cols then recruit an additional OM protein as a ‘translocator’ that the toxin uses to pass speciﬁc
rRNase E3–Im3
tRNase E5–Im5
tRNase D–ImD
DNase E7–Im7
Fig. 2. Structures for Col cytotoxic nuclease domains complexed with their cognate Im proteins. ColD
tRNase–ImD (PDB ID: 1V74), ColE7 DNase–Im7 (PDB ID: 1MZ8), ColE3 rRNase–Im3 (PDB ID:
1E44) and ColE5 tRNase–Im5 (PDB ID: 2FHZ) are shown in ribbon representation, with the nuclease in
green and Im protein in magenta.
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
63


--- Page 8 ---
peptide epitopes to the periplasm, which are located within the disordered or unstructured
regions of its T-domain and may even, it has been argued, be used to translocate the entire
cytotoxic domain to the periplasm (Fig. 3). Porins such as OmpF and OmpC are most often used
as translocator proteins. Other known translocators include TolC, which forms the exit tunnel
for a multidrug eﬄux pump, and in at least one case it has been shown that a nutrient receptor
can also serve as a translocator (Section 4).
Col translocation across the E. coli OM requires contact between speciﬁc peptide-signalling
epitopes within the T-domain of the receptor-bound Col and one of two periplasmic systems of
the bacterium (Section 5). Group A Cols (such as ColE1–ColE9, ColA and ColN) contact Tol,
while group B Cols (such as ColIa, ColB, ColD and ColM) contact Ton (Davies & Reeves, 1975a,
b). Both systems, which are evolutionarily related to the stator proteins MotA and MotB of the
bacterial ﬂagellar motor, are coupled to the PMF across the IM, acting as energy transducers for
OM stability (Tol) and active transport of iron siderophores and vitamin B12 across the OM
(Ton). While there is some involvement of PMF in Col toxicity it remains unclear as to how
much of the translocation process is PMF dependent (Section 6).
The Ton system consists of three IM proteins TonB, ExbB and ExbD (Postle & Kadner,
2003). The central components of the Tol system are three IM proteins, TolA, TolQ and
TolR, and two periplasmic proteins, TolB, a soluble protein, and Pal, which is anchored to the
OM (Webster, 1991). TolA and TonB are each thought to span the periplasm and, through
Fig. 3. Cols can be grouped according to which import route they take into an E. coli cell. Group A Cols
contact the Tol system while group B Cols contact the Ton system. Both Col groups can deliver a cytotoxic
pore-forming or nuclease to the cell. Each requires initial binding to a high-aﬃnity receptor followed by
recruitment of a translocator protein. The translocator is utilized to deposit one or more signalling epitopes
to the periplasm that subvert the normal functions of the Tol or Ton systems, both of which are coupled to
the PMF across the IM. Figure adapted from (Kleanthous, 2010) with permission from the Nature
Publishing Group.
64
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 9 ---
associations with their IM partners, transduce the PMF into conformational transitions although
what form these transitions take and how they ‘energize’ events at the OM are yet to be eluci-
dated. Group A Col translocation generally requires an intact TolQRA complex with some Cols
also requiring TolB. Pal is the only component of the Tol system not required by any known Col
(Lazzaroni et al. 2002), conﬁrmed by a recent genome-wide survey that identiﬁed many pre-
viously unknown genes involved in Col uptake but not Pal (Sharma et al. 2009). Although Pal is a
central component of the Tol apparatus its lack of involvement in Col translocation likely reﬂects
its function as an OFF-switch for Tol signalling (Bonsor et al. 2009b) (Section 5). Gene deletions
of additional cytoplasmic (YbgC) and periplasmic (YbgF) proteins encoded within the tol operon
show no discernible tol phenotype of OM instability (usually assayed by lack of bacterial growth
in the presence of SDS) and are also not required for Col toxicity (Krachler et al. 2010).
An intriguing feature of Col import, triggered by contact with Tol or Ton proteins, is that Cols
can be readily engineered to translocate by the opposing pathway; for example, it has been
shown that a group A Col can be converted into a group B Col merely by engineering the
appropriate recognition epitopes (Pilsl & Braun, 1998). This argues that import across the OM is
likely to be by the same process for both group A and group B Cols involving contact with a
system close to the underside of the OM that also traverses the periplasm and is linked to the
PMF across the IM.
For pore-forming and peptidoglycan-cleaving Cols, the journey into the cell ends in the peri-
plasm where they exert their cytotoxic activities. Nuclease Cols, however, continue on through
the IM in order to reach their cytoplasmic nucleic acid targets. While this aspect of import has
not been investigated extensively, studies suggest it may involve proteolytic processing and direct
interaction between the nuclease domain and the cytoplasmic membrane followed by retro-
translocation and refolding in the cytoplasm (Section 7).
4. Receptor binding and recruitment of OM translocator proteins
4.1 Receptor binding
The ﬁrst step in the import of Cols into E. coli is binding to an OM receptor. Cols have evolved
to parasitize a wide variety of OM proteins, including the vitamin B12 receptor BtuB used by
E Cols ColE1–ColE9 and ColA, ferrichrome-iron receptor FhuA used by ColM, ferrientero-
bactin receptor FepA used by ColB and ColD, iron transport receptor Cir used by ColIa
and ColIb, the nucleoside-speciﬁc channel-forming protein Tsx used by ColK, Col5 and Col10,
and porins OmpF, OmpA and OmpW used by Cols N, S4 and U, respectively (Table 1).
Structural and biophysical data are available for a number of these Col-receptor complexes. In
the case of ColN (a group A Col), biochemical and electron microscopy (EM) studies indicate
that the Col binds with a Kdy1 mM (Bourdineaud et al. 1990b) to the outer surface of OmpF
(Baboolal et al. 2008). Two-dimensional (2D) crystals of OmpF obtained in the presence and
absence of a fragment of ColN containing the receptor-binding and pore-forming domains
(at 25 A˚ resolution) revealed electron density at the interface between two monomers of the
OmpF trimer. Density for lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is normally bound to OmpF, was
absent in this co-crystal suggesting that Col-binding displaces LPS, a hypothesis conﬁrmed by
biochemical data (Baboolal et al. 2008).
High-resolution crystal structures have been published for the R-domains of three Cols bound
to their primary receptors; group A Cols ColE2 (PDB ID, 2YSU) (Sharma et al. 2007) and ColE3
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
65


--- Page 10 ---
(PDB ID, 1UJW) (Kurisu et al. 2003) bound to BtuB, and ColIa, a group B Col, bound to Cir
(PDB ID, 2HDI) (Buchanan et al. 2007) (Fig. 4). In both sets of complexes the Col-binding site
overlaps that of the natural ligand. The buried surface areas of Cols E2 and E3 bound to BtuB
are 1287 and 1533 A˚ 2, respectively. The ColIa–Cir complex has a relatively small buried surface
area of 990 A˚ 2. Although the complexes of ColIa and ColE3 (and ColE2) are unrelated to each
other their respective OM receptors show two striking similarities. First, both Cols bind at an
y45x angle relative to the membrane, which positions the T-domain and Col cytotoxic domain
(C-domain) well away from the receptor and, second, Col-binding does not displace the central
plug of the receptor. Transporters such as BtuB and Cir are 22-strand b-barrels with a large central
pore that is sealed by a soluble plug domain. The plug has to be displaced in order to allow entry
of the cognate ligand of the receptor in a PMF-dependent process involving contact between the
TonB box of the receptor and periplasmic TonB. The TonB box is an N-terminal, periplasmi-
cally located peptide sequence which signals to TonB when the ligand is bound to the receptor.
A further striking feature of Col binding to these receptors is that there is little or no change to
their TonB boxes. Binding of Cols E2 and E3 to BtuB causes ordering of the N-terminal Ser4–
Pro5 residues of the TonB box of the receptor but no changes were evident in the ColIa–Cir
complex structure (Buchanan et al. 2007; Kurisu et al. 2003; Sharma et al. 2007). Conformational
changes do occur in the receptors, however, but are localized to the extracellular regions. In the
complexes of Cols E2 and E3 there are alterations in the conformations of surface loops while in
the complex of ColIa–Cir a lid domain in the receptor opens in order for the Col to bind.
It has been suggested that interactions between the R-domain of enzymatic Cols and
BtuB¡OmpF lead to unfolding of the Col although this has proven controversial. The
suggestion is based on (i) some disordering of the ends of the coiled-coil R-domain in the ColE3-
bound structure (Kurisu et al. 2003); (ii) changes in the CD spectrum for the complex relative
to the unbound proteins (Kurisu et al. 2003); (iii) changes in measured distances between the
cytotoxic and T-domain of the Col (Fig. 1) as measured by ﬂuorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET), these eﬀects dependent on the presence of the translocator OmpF in the OM
OM
Cir
Col Ia
Col E3
BtuB
OmpF
Cir
Im3
IUTD
IUTD
Fig. 4. Structures of Cols Ia and E3–Im3 bound to their primary receptors, Cir and BtuB, respectively,
depicting the recruitment of translocator proteins through their intrinsically unstructured translocation
domains (IUTDs). Following binding to its primary receptor (PDB ID: 2HDI and 1CII), ColIa binds a
second copy of the Cir protein (PDB ID: 2HDF) although the mechanism involved is unknown. After
binding to BtuB (PDB ID: 1UJW and 1JCH), the ColE3–Im3 complex recruits OmpF (PDB ID: 3O0E)
through speciﬁc OmpF-binding sites (OBSs). See Figs 5–7 for details.
66
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 11 ---
(Zakharov et al. 2008). The suggestion that the R-domain becomes disordered in its distal ends
on binding BtuB contrasts the conclusions of Housden et al., who found that the thermo-
dynamics of binding between ColE9 and BtuB (Kdy2 nM), as measured by isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC), were unchanged in a disulﬁde-locked mutant of the Col (Housden et al. 2005);
detailed discussion on the thermodynamics of Col complexes have been reviewed recently
(Housden & Kleanthous, 2011). The disulﬁde, positioned within the coiled-coil and distal to the
receptor, was designed to block opening of the coiled-coil following receptor binding and does
indeed abolish Col toxicity unless reduced (Penfold et al. 2004a). These observations are con-
sistent with the coiled-coil of the R-domain undergoing signiﬁcant structural changes but that
these likely occur post receptor binding, for example, during translocation across the OM
(Section 5).
Since the plug domains of BtuB and Cir bound to Col R-domains show little or no change in
conformation, this tends to rule out a translocation path through the primary receptor. A similar
conclusion was reached for ColB binding its receptor FepA using ﬂuorescein maleimide labelling
of unique cysteine residues (Smallwood et al. 2009). As the central channels of Col receptors do
not appear to be the routes of translocation to the periplasm this explains why additional OM
proteins have to be recruited. This assertion is consistent with the way in which the T- and
C-domains of enzymatic E Cols and ColIa are presented well away from their primary receptors,
in a bid to recruit a translocator (Fig. 4). There has been much recent progress in our under-
standing of how such translocators are recruited and indeed how they are then used to deliver
essential signalling epitopes to the periplasm.
4.2 Translocator recruitment and the mechanism of T-domain translocation to the periplasm
Col recruitment of a translocator protein in the E. coli OM is through interactions with regions
of the Col that comprise the intrinsically unstructured translocation domain (IUTD), which
has been shown for ColE3 and ColE9 and more recently ColIa (Housden et al. 2005; Jakes &
Finkelstein, 2010; Kurisu et al. 2003) (Fig. 4). An exception to this rule is ColN, one of the
smallest Cols known, which is thought to use the same OmpF to which it is bound as the trans-
location route for its IUTD (El Kouhen et al. 1993). In most instances, however, it is likely that
an additional OM protein needs to be recruited as the translocator. In the case of ColIa, an
additional copy of the Cir protein is recruited (Jakes & Finkelstein, 2010), whereas enzymatic
Cols such as ColE3 and ColE9 recruit OmpF or OmpC to the receptor-bound Col (Housden
et al. 2005; Kurisu et al. 2003; Zakharov & Cramer, 2004). Two translocation routes of Col
IUTDs to the periplasm via porins have been postulated; translocation through the porin lumen
or via the lipid–protein interface (Baboolal et al. 2008; Housden et al. 2010; Yamashita et al. 2008).
The following sections detail work on Cols ColE3 and ColE9, which explain how porin trans-
locators are recruited and that, at least for these Cols, the lumen of the porin is clearly the route
by which a speciﬁc signalling epitope within the IUTD is delivered to the periplasm.
Housden et al. ﬁrst showed that Col IUTDs are used to recruit a translocator following binding
of the Col to its receptor in the E. coli OM (Housden et al. 2005). Using the ColE9–Im9 complex
in which the Im protein was His-tagged (and where the Col was disulﬁde-locked to prevent cell-
killing), they demonstrated that the entire ColE9–Im9–BtuB–OmpF complex could be aﬃnity-
puriﬁed from OM extracts but that recruitment of OmpF was lost when the 83-residue IUTD
was deleted. Consistent with this region being sequestered post receptor-binding, Zhang et al.
reported that unique enterokinase cleavage sites engineered in the ﬁrst 61 residues of the IUTD
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
67


--- Page 12 ---
became inaccessible to enzymatic cleavage after binding to BtuB in the OM (Zhang et al. 2008).
Housden et al. went on to delineate the regions of the ColE9 IUTD involved in binding OmpF
using a combination of deletion analysis and ITC (Housden et al. 2010). They showed that
the primary OmpF binding site (OBS1), Kdy2 mM, comprises residues 2–18 of the Col (the
N-terminal methionine is often missing in ColE9). They also identiﬁed a second, weaker, OmpF
binding site (OBS2) further along the IUTD between residues 54 and 63, which binds OmpF
with a Kdy25 mM. Importantly, binding of OBS2 is blocked by the presence of OBS1 suggesting
that they share the same binding site. Moreover, the two OBSs ﬂank the 16-residue TolB-binding
epitope (TBE; comprising residues 32–47) in the centre of the IUTD, previously identiﬁed by
Loftus et al. (2006) (Fig. 5; Section 5). Mutational analysis revealed that many ColE9 OBS1 side
chains are involved in stabilizing the complex with OmpF although none are essential for
binding or toxicity. In addition, these studies suggested that conformational ﬂexibility of the
epitope (which is rich in glycine residues) and a free N-terminus are major factors in binding to
the porin. Cell-killing assays demonstrated that at least one OBS is required for antibiotic activity.
Housden et al. also showed that the relative importance of the OBS sites is diﬀerent in cells
expressing either OmpF or OmpC, emphasizing that the two porins do not behave identically in
terms of Col translocation. A luminal translocation route to the periplasm was revealed by the
31 A˚ crystal structure of the OmpF–OBS1 complex in which the peptide was bound in an
extended, crescent-shaped conformation (Fig. 6a). OBS1 spans the membrane bilayer in its
.       TBE        .                                                                            .                      TAB                          . 
ColA  MPGFNYGGKGDGTGWSSERG---SGPEPGGGSHGNSGGHDRGDSSN-VGNESV--TVMKPGDSYNTPWGKVIINAAGQPTMNGTVMTADNSSMVPYGRGF 94 
.                   OBS1                         .    .         TBE                         .  OBS2       .. 
ColE9 MSGG--DGRGHNTGAHSTSGNINGGPTGIGVSGGASDGSGWSSENNPWGGGSG--SGIHWGGGSGRGNGGGNGNSGGGSGTGGNLSAVAAP--VAFGFPA 94 
                                                                .                  TAB                     . 
ColN  -MGSNGADNAHNNAFGGGKNPGIGNTSGAGSNGSASSNRGNSNGWS-WSNKPHKNDGFHSDGSYHITFHGDNNSKPKPGGNSGNRGNNGDGASAKVGEIT 98 
Fig. 5. Sequence alignment of N-terminal IUTD sequences of ColA, ColE9 and ColN showing the pres-
ence of the various OmpF, TolB (TBE) and TolA (TAB) binding epitopes.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6. Structure of the OmpF-ColE9 OBS1 (PDB ID: 3O0E) and OmpFColE3 IUTD (PDB ID: 2ZLD)
complexes. (a) OmpF monomer shown in green ribbon (OmpF is trimeric in its native state) with ColE9
OBS1 peptide (chain L, residues 2–16) modelled into the electron density map (2Fo–Fc, shown at 1s sigma
cut-oﬀ) within the lumen. Note how the Col traverses the constriction point at the centre of the porin. (b)
Superposition of the Col peptide structures from the complex of the ColE3 IUTD, where y7 residues of
unassigned sequence could be seen, and the structure of ColE9 OBS1 bound to OmpF, shown as a
molecular surface cut-away to reveal the lumen of the porin. The OBS1 peptide is shown in red and the
fragment from the ColE3 IUTD in yellow. Figure adapted from Housden et al. (2010) with permission from
the National Academy of Sciences (USA).
68
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 13 ---
complex with OmpF, traversing the central constriction point of the porin channel that generally
restricts molecules of >600 Da passing across the OM (Fig. 6b). Moreover, the orientation of
OBS1 is with its N-terminus facing the periplasm and C-terminus exposed to the extracellular
surface where the rest of the receptor-bound Col would be located.
A translocation route for the ColE9 IUTD to the periplasm through the lumen of the porin is
also supported by a separate series of studies on the ColE3 IUTD from the Cramer laboratory;
the two enzymatic Cols share y90% sequence identity in their 83-residue IUTD. Focusing on
the voltage-gated channels displayed by OmpF in planar-lipid bilayer experiments, Zhaharov et al.
demonstrated that the IUTD of ColE3 blocks OmpF channel activity (Zakharov et al. 2004a),
suggesting that the polypeptide blocks the porin lumen. They subsequently obtained a 30 A˚
resolution structure of OmpF crystallized in the presence of the ColE3 IUTD which showed the
presence of density corresponding to y7 amino acids although the identity of these residues,
which did not pass the constriction point in OmpF, could not be ascertained (Yamashita et al.
2008) (Fig. 6b). The subsequent structure from Housden et al. conﬁrmed these residues as likely
corresponding to the OBS1 sequence of the IUTD (Housden et al. 2010).
The investigations of the ColE3 and ColE9 IUTDs are consistent with the disordered domain
recruiting OmpF through a sequential binding mechanism in which OBS1 ﬁrst docks into the
porin lumen followed by diﬀusion of the polypeptide toward the periplasm (possibly guided by
the overhanging receptor-bound Col), subsequent docking of OBS2 in the lumen and presen-
tation of the Col’s TBE for binding TolB (Fig. 7). The initial driving force for binding of the
OBSs to the OmpF lumen, which is cation selective, is likely to be electrostatic since both have
overall positive charge. The intervening sequence between the two OBSs does not bind OmpF –
the TBE is negatively charged and does not bind OmpF in ITC experiments, plus this region
contains two proline residues and prolines were shown to abolish peptide binding to the OmpF
lumen (Housden et al. 2010).
An important new development for probing Col import is the use of single molecule methods.
Spector et al. have shown using Total Internal Reﬂection Fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy that
the lateral diﬀusion of the ColE3-bound BtuB complex is relatively unhindered in the E. coli OM
but that of OmpF is restricted, implying collision between receptor and translocator must occur
to enable Col translocation (Spector et al. 2010). It is likely that future single molecule methods
such as TIRF will feature prominently in the elucidation of Col import into bacterial cells.
5. Recruitment of periplasmic proteins to form a translocon complex at the OM
The term ‘translocon complex’ has been coined to describe the self-assembled supramolecular
assembly formed between the Col and its receptor, translocator and periplasmic binding partners
(Kurisu et al. 2003), by analogy with the translocons of secretory systems (Johnson & van Waes,
1999; Keenan et al. 2001; Pohlschroder et al. 1997). Formation of the translocon is thought to
trigger Col translocation across the OM. Translocon assembly requires the presentation of spe-
ciﬁc signalling epitopes located within the IUTD in the periplasm via translocator proteins, as
described in Section 4. For the group B Col ColIa, which uses the Cir protein as receptor and
translocator, a TonB box is delivered that is presumed to mimic the interactions of the TonB box
of nutrient receptors with TonB. How the IUTD of ColIa delivers its TonB box through the
translocator Cir protein remains to be established. Much more is known about the interactions of
IUTD signalling epitopes of group A Cols with their periplasmic binding partners where mol-
ecular mimicry has been shown to play an important role in the establishment of the translocon
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
69


--- Page 14 ---
complex. The following sections summarize this research, which includes work on the IUTDs of
both pore-forming (ColA and ColN) and enzymatic (ColE9) Cols.
5.1 ColE9
Enzymatic Cols E2–E9 contain a 16-residue signalling epitope within their IUTDs called the
TBE that binds TolB with low mM aﬃnity. Col TBE residues are essential for antibiotic activity;
mutations abolish Col toxicity in vivo and TolB binding in vitro (Bouveret et al. 1998; Hands et al.
2005). TolB is a 44-kDa protein that has an N-terminal a-/b-domain and C-terminal, six-bladed
b-propeller domain that binds the OM lipoprotein Pal with sub-mM aﬃnity as part of the Tol
system in the bacterial periplasm. Crystal structures have revealed that both the ColE9 TBE and
Pal bind to the same canyon binding site on the b-propeller domain, distal to the N-terminal
domain (Bonsor et al. 2007; Loftus et al. 2006) suggesting that the Col ‘competitively recruits’
TolB from its complex with Pal (Loftus et al. 2006). The soluble domain of Pal, comprised a four-
stranded b-sheet and four a-helices, contacts the canyon in two sites (Fig. 8a) (Bonsor et al.
2007). Helix III of Pal interacts with TolB through residues 110–130 (Site 1) while a neigh-
bouring loop accompanied by a b-strand interacts with TolB through residues 144–163 (Site 2)
(Fig. 8b). The intrinsically unstructured ColE9 TBE does not adopt regular secondary structure
TolB
IUTD
TAB
TolA
TolQ
TolR
OmpF
BtuB
ColE3
IM
OM
pmf
Fig. 7. Overview of early OM events during cell entry of Group A nuclease Cols. Following binding to
BtuB (vitamin B12 transporter, blue) through its R-domain (ColE3–Im3 bound to BtuB is shown), the
Col–Im protein complex (gold and yellow, respectively) recruits OmpF (green) through its IUTD (shown as
spheres), ﬁrst docking the OBS1 epitope (red spheres) into the lumen of the porin followed by OBS2
(yellow spheres). The Col’s TBE (magenta spheres) then binds TolB (pink) in the periplasm. Col mimics
interactions of the lipoprotein Pal (not shown), but unlike Pal enhances the recruitment of TolA (magenta
cylinders) through the disordered N-terminal TAB of TolB (green line). TolA is coupled to the PMF
through its associations with TolR (cyan cylinders) and TolQ (orange cylinders) in the IM. Contact between
TolB and TolA in the periplasm triggers release of the Im protein to the external medium in a PMF-
dependent step that initiates Col translocation into the cell.
70
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 15 ---
on binding TolB, but rather an unusual conformation resembling a distorted paperclip (Fig. 8).
Importantly, Glu42 and Trp39 of the ColE9 TBE mimic interactions made by Glu116 and
Tyr117, respectively, of Pal with TolB at Site 1 while Trp46 of the ColE9 TBE is buried within
a Site 2 pocket on TolB that has no equivalent in the Pal complex due to accompanying con-
formational changes (Fig. 8b). This latter contact has important implications for TolB signalling
to TolA, which is discussed below. In contrast, no conformational changes occur in TolB as a
result of ColE9 TBE binding, which is also relevant to the mechanism of Col translocation.
The buried solvent-accessible surface area in the TolB–Pal complex is signiﬁcantly greater
than the surface area buried in the ColE9–TolB complex (2600 versus 1600 A˚ 2), although the latter
shows greater complementarity (Loftus et al. 2006). TolB undergoes signiﬁcant conformational
changes in both its domains on binding Pal, while Pal undergoes only limited change in con-
formation; helix III of Pal unwinds by 19 A˚ due to steric and electrostatic clashes with TolB
residues. Both the Pal and ColE9 TBE complexes with TolB are stabilized by a signiﬁcant number
of hydrogen bonds, which are mostly intermolecular in the Pal complex but intramolecular in the
ColE9 TBE complex. The outcome of these structural diﬀerences between the Pal and ColE9
TBE complexes with TolB is a 20-fold diﬀerence in their aﬃnities, but these aﬃnities are tuned
by the presence of divalent metal ions such as Ca2+ that bind within the tunnel running through
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8. (a) Superposition of the complexes of E. coli TolB (grey) with the ColE9 TBE (cyan, PDB ID 1IVZ)
and Pal (red, PDB ID 2HQS). Two Ca2+ ions (yellow) are present in the ColE9 TBE structure while the
TolB TAB (green), 22Glu-Ser33, is only visible in the Pal-bound structure. (b) Comparison of the TolB-
binding site canyon (grey) where both the ColE9-TBE (magenta) and Pal (yellow) dock. Only helix III (Site 1,
residues 110–130) of Pal and its neighbouring loop and b-strand (Site 2, residues 144–163) are shown for
clarity. ColE9 TBE residues Glu42 and Trp39 mimic hydrogen bond interactions made by Pal residues
Glu116 and Tyr117, respectively. ColE9 Trp46, on the other hand, binds in a deep pocket in Site 2 on the
TolB surface for which there is no equivalent in the Pal complex due to conformational changes that occlude
the pocket. Binding of ColE9 Trp46 into Site 2 shifts the conformational equilibrium of TolB so that the
TolB TAB undergoes an order–disorder transition and so becomes available for binding TolA (See Fig. 7).
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
71


--- Page 16 ---
the b-propeller domain of TolB (Fig. 8a). The aﬃnity of Pal for TolB in the absence of metal
ions is 47 nM, as measured by ITC (Loftus et al. 2006), with binding involving a single proto-
nation event (Bonsor et al. 2007). Moreover, binding is enthalpically and entropically favoured,
consistent with the signiﬁcant hydrophobic contact and extensive hydrogen bonding between
the two proteins. Under the same metal-free conditions, the ColE9–TBE binds TolB with an
aﬃnity of 1 mM where the association is enthalpically favourable but entropically unfavourable in
accordance with the signiﬁcant loss of conformational entropy upon binding as the intrinsically
disordered ColE9 TBE folds. In the presence of 1 mM Ca2+ ions, the aﬃnity for Pal is reduced
2-fold (y100 nM), becoming equivalent to the aﬃnity of ColE9 under the same conditions
(Loftus et al. 2006). This 10-fold increase in the aﬃnity of ColE9–TBE for TolB is largely
explained by electrostratic interactions. In the presence of Ca2+ ions, the lower region of the
TolB canyon has an overall positive charge, which favours association of the negatively charged
ColE9–TBE. It is reasonable to conclude that divalent metal ions, which are abundant in the
E. coli cell envelope, would have to be bound in order for the ColE9–TBE to competitively
recruit TolB from its complex with Pal. Binding of TolB by the Col would also be favoured by
virtue of Pal’s other binding interaction in the periplasm, which is to peptidoglycan (Parsons et al.
2006). TolB and peptidoglycan binding are mutually exclusive of each other (Bouveret et al. 1999)
and so free TolB would invariably be available for Col binding.
The conformational changes within the C-terminal b-propeller of TolB that result from
Pal binding are transmitted to the N-terminal a-/b-domain of TolB through motions of loops
and b-strands of the C-terminus. These changes are relayed to the N-terminal domain of
TolB through the hinge connecting the two domains and speciﬁcally between a b-strand of the
b-propeller domain and residues Glu22–Ser33, the N-terminal most residues of TolB (Bonsor
et al. 2007). Residues Glu22–Ser33 are disordered in crystal structures of TolB as well as in the
ColE9 TBE–TolB complex, but become ordered in the Pal complex, binding in a cleft between
the N- and C-terminal domains of TolB that becomes exposed when Pal is bound (Fig. 8a)
(Bonsor et al. 2009b). Deletion of TolB resides Glu22–Ser33 results in a tol OM instability
phenotype characteristic of a tolB deletion, showing that this region is indispensable for in vivo
functionality of the Tol system, and renders E. coli cells resistant to Cols, indicating their im-
portance to OM translocation. Taken together, these studies reveal that TolB is an allosteric
protein whereby Pal and the ColE9–TBE are opposing allosteric eﬀectors modulating the ac-
cessibility of the Glu22–Ser33 sequence at its N-terminus.
The role of the TolB N-terminal residues Glu22–Ser33 was revealed when it was shown using
cross-linking and ITC by Bonsor et al. that this epitope is the binding site for the C-terminal
domain of TolA, which we refer to as the TolA box (TAB) (Fig. 7). TolA has three domains,
an N-terminal transmembrane helix (TMH; domain I), a central domain postulated to form a
coiled-coil that spans the periplasm (domain II) and a small globular C-terminal domain (domain
III or TolAIII). Binding between TolAIII and TolB through the TAB is weak (Kdy43 mM) and
endothermic in ITC experiments indicating an entropically driven interaction (Bonsor et al.
2009b). Pal abolishes binding between TolB and TolAIII in ITC experiments while the ColE9
TBE enhances binding 4-fold and switches the thermodynamics of binding from endothermic to
exothermic. These eﬀects can be explained by the structural and biophysical properties of the
two complexes. Pal binding to TolB sequesters the TAB to the surface of TolB while ColE9 TBE
binding renders the TAB disordered and available for TolAIII binding. Hence, even though the
ColE9–TBE mimics interactions made by Pal, the eﬀect of its binding to TolB has a diﬀerent
conformational outcome. The key diﬀerence between the complexes is the hydrophobic contact
72
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 17 ---
made by ColE9–TBE Trp46 in Site 2 on the surface of TolB. The deep pocket into which Trp46
inserts is only accessible in TolB in the absence of conformational changes, which unlike Pal the
Col does not induce. Moreover, these data suggest that TolB is in conformational equilibrium
between these two structural states, with Pal and the ColE9–TBE stabilizing opposing states
(Bonsor et al. 2009b). Not only does this interpretation correspond to the changes observed in
binding thermodynamics between TolB and its protein ligands but is also supported by solution
NMR experiments; the TolB TAB sequence is only discernible in 1H-15N-HSQC (heteronuclear
single-quantum coherence) spectra as an intrinsically disordered polypeptide when TolB is
bound to the ColE9–TBE (Bonsor et al. 2009b).
Based on these observations a model for the hijacking and activation of the Tol system by
ColE9 has been proposed in which the Col manipulates the allosteric transition of TolB. In the
Pal-bound state, the TolB TAB is folded against the surface of the protein disfavouring binding
to TolA, signalling the OFF-state for the system (Fig. 8a). In the ColE9–TBE-bound state, the
TolB TAB is disordered and available to bind TolA, signalling an ON-state for the Tol system
(Fig. 7). Hence, the recruitment of TolB to the ColE9 translocon results in this surface bound
toxin being able to make a connection to the PMF through protein–protein interactions that
promote contact between TolB in the periplasm and TolA in the IM (Bonsor et al. 2009b). The
potential outcome of this contact is explored further in Section 6.
Studies of Col parasitization of the Tol system have highlighted two important functional
characteristics of this trans-periplasmic complex. First, the order–disorder transition of the TolB
TAB that lies at the heart of the interaction between TolB and TolA is reminiscent of the order–
disorder transitions of OM receptor TonB boxes and TonB (Cadieux et al. 2003; Wiener, 2005),
suggesting that the same basic signalling mechanism underpins the Ton and Tol systems of
Gram-negative bacteria (Kleanthous, 2010). Second, these studies cast doubt on the generally
accepted view of Tol function, which is that of a PMF-driven machine ensuring appropriate
juxtaposition of the inner and OMs. Components of the Tol system are known to be recruited to
septation sites in E. coli (Gerding et al. 2007), consistent with Tol function being predominantly
expressed during cell division. A role as a transmembrane tether necessitates interaction between
Pal in the OM and TolA in the IM, originally suggested by in vivo cross-linking experiments
(Cascales et al. 2000, 2001). Moreover, it has been argued that this periplasmic interaction is
regulated by cellular PMF (Cascales et al. 2000, 2001). However, extensive biochemical and
biophysical analysis using puriﬁed Pal and TolA failed to demonstrate such an interaction in vitro
(Bonsor et al. 2009a). An indirect interaction between Pal and TolAIII via TolB is also unlikely
given that Pal diminishes/abolishes the interaction between TolA and TolB (see above). It
remains to be elucidated how and for what physiological purpose Tol signalling is deployed
during cell division.
5.2 ColN
The N-terminal 90 residues of the pore-forming Col ColN comprise its IUTD (Raggett et al.
1998; Vetter et al. 1998). Unlike ColE9, ColN does not require TolB for Col antibiotic activity
(and does not bind TolB in vitro), but rather contacts TolA directly through its own TAB sequence,
residues Asn42–Gly68 (Gokce et al. 2000). There is no sequence similarity between the TABs of
TolB and ColN (Fig. 5). The structure for the TolAIII–ColN TAB complex is not yet known,
but FRET and NMR experiments indicate that the TAB epitope undergoes a disorder–order
transition and that its two tryptophan residues (Trp44 and Trp46) are buried on binding TolAIII
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
73


--- Page 18 ---
(Anderluh et al. 2003; Raggett et al. 1998), reminiscent of ColE9–TBE binding TolB. The ColN–
IUTD interaction with TolAIII has been studied extensively by the Lakey and Moore labora-
tories by mutagenesis, surface plasmon resonance (SPR), ITC and NMR. Intact ColN binds
TolAIII with a Kd of 18 mM, with this aﬃnity increasing 20-fold when the T-domain in isolation
is used (Raggett et al. 1998). These diﬀerences in binding suggest that the TAB sequence may be
sequestered in intact ColN, possibly through interactions with other parts of the Col. This
interpretation has been borne out by heteronuclear NMR experiments which show the IUTD
contacts the R-domain of the Col through what has been coined ‘self-recognition’ (Hecht et al.
2008). NMR data also indicate that parts of the IUTD may in fact be partially structured (Hecht
et al. 2008), with binding to TolAIII requiring the disassembling of this structure prior to binding
(Hecht et al. 2009b).
A critical part of the TAB (61SYHITFH67) is thought to adopt a b-conformation upon com-
plexation with TolAIII (Hecht et al. 2009b). The involvement of a tyrosine residue (Tyr62) within
the TAB suggests the binding interaction may be analogous to the binding motifs of other
TolAIII binding proteins such as the N1 domain of g3p, which contacts TolAIII as part of
the infection process of bacteriophage fd. Indeed, comparison of the crystal structure of
TolAIII–N1 g3p (Lubkowski et al. 1999) with chemical shift mapping data, using a 13C/15N-
labelled TolAII–III binding unlabelled ColN T-domain, have suggested that not only are the
binding sites of g3p and ColN overlapping on TolAIII but that similar conformational changes
may be induced in the Tol protein (Hecht et al. 2009b).
5.3 ColA
The IUTD of ColA requires both TolB and TolA for cytotoxic activity (Benedetti et al. 1991),
with biophysical experiments indicating that both are bound by distinct and recognizable Tol
binding sites; an N-terminal TBE (residues Lys9–Glu18) (Zhang et al. 2009b) and a C-terminal
TAB (residues 58–90 (Cascales et al. 2007; Deprez et al. 2002; Hecht et al. 2010; Journet et al.
2001) (Fig. 5). Interestingly, the ColA–TBE, which bears strong sequence similarity to the
ColE9–TBE is close to the N-terminus of the Col, similar to the position of the ColE9 OBS1.
This raises the interesting possibility that the 20 ﬁrst residues of the ColA N-terminus may serve
a dual role, both recruiting OmpF and contacting TolB during Col translocation.
The ColA–TBE encompasses the N-terminal half of the 16-residue ColE9–TBE. With fewer
amino acids involved in binding it is not surprising that the aﬃnity of the ColA–TBE–TolB
complex is signiﬁcantly weaker than its ColE9 counterpart; Kd 16 mM, in the presence of Ca2+
ions, compared to 90 nM for ColE9 (Loftus et al. 2006; Zhang et al. 2009b). The crystal structure
of the ColA–TBE bound to TolB shows a similar mode of binding to the TolB b-propeller as
ColE9 (Zhang et al. 2009b). The RMSD for the core elements of the ColA and ColE9 TBEs
bound to TolB is 039 A˚ , with a greater number of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interac-
tions observed in the larger ColE9–TBE complex, consistent with its higher aﬃnity. In par-
ticular, the key hydrogen bond interactions of Glu42 and Trp39 of the ColE9–TBE, which
mimic the interactions of Pal with TolB (see above), are emulated in the ColA–TBE–TolB
complex by Glu18 and Trp15 of ColA, respectively.
The ColA TAB binds TolAIII in SPR experiments with a Kdy05 mM (Derouiche et al. 1997).
However, the structural delineation of the complex has proven elusive because of the unusual
characteristics of the complex in solution. Using NMR, Deprez et al. reported that binding of
ColA to TolAIII caused the domain to unfold, conﬁrmed by subsequent NMR studies (Hecht
74
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 19 ---
et al. 2009b). The physiological relevance of this eﬀect has been questioned by Hecht et al. who
found that no unfolding was observed if ColA T-domain constructs were used that only con-
tained the binding site for TolAIII (constructs by Deprez et al. contained binding sites for both
TolA and TolB) or if TolB was added to the ColA T-domain–TolAIII complex (Hecht et al.
2010). These latter experiments also conﬁrmed that a ternary complex of ColA T-domain–TolB–
TolA could be formed in vitro (Hecht et al. 2010), ﬁrst shown by antibody overlay experiments
(Bouveret et al. 1998). Hecht et al. have also shown through NMR chemical shift mapping that
the binding sites for all TolAIII protein partners thus far characterized (N1 domain of g3p, ColN
TAB and ColA TAB) are distinct but overlap each other. It remains to be seen if this binding
region coincides with that of the cognate binding partner for TolAIII in the bacterial periplasm,
the TAB of TolB.
The question arises as to why ColA requires contact with two Tol proteins when contact with
TolA or TolB is suﬃcient to catalyse translocation for other Cols such as ColN and ColE9? This
requirement likely reﬂects the twin problems of (i) weaker TolB binding than that required to
competitively recruit TolB from its higher-aﬃnity complex with Pal (which is supported by
analytical gel ﬁltration experiments (Zhang et al. 2009b); and (ii) the inability of ColA to allo-
sterically promote contact between TolB and TolA. Although this has not been formally ad-
dressed in biophysical experiments, the structure of the ColA–TBE–TolB complex shows that
there is no interaction equivalent to that of Trp46 of the ColE9–TBE (Figs 5 and 8), which
inserts into a deep pocket in Site 2 on the TolB surface (Section 5). Occupation of this site by the
tryptophan is important for manipulation of the conformational equilibrium in TolB and hence
for enhancing binding between TolB and TolAIII (Bonsor et al. 2009b). Without such an inter-
action it is unlikely the ColA T-domain could promote the interaction between TolA and TolB.
Some studies have suggested that translocating Cols can contact other Tol proteins in addition
to TolB and TolA. For example, pull-down and immunoprecipitation assays have suggested that
the group A Col ColK simultaneously contacts TolB, TolA, TolQ and TolR (Barneoud-Arnoulet
et al. 2010b), although the speciﬁc binding epitopes on the Col for the IM proteins TolQ and
TolR have not been elucidated. It is also unclear as to how ColK contacts TolB since it does not
contain a recognizable TBE sequence.
6. Col translocation across the OM and the role of the PMF
How Cols translocate cytotoxic domains across the OM following assembly of their translocons
is not understood. Some of the contributing processes to this event have emerged, however,
from work on both pore-forming and nuclease Cols. Signiﬁcant conformational changes to the
Col are thought to be associated with OM translocation, which is unsurprising given that these
are folded proteins bound to the external surface of the cell. Urea denaturation experiments and
disulﬁde bond engineering have both suggested that ColA undergoes large-scale structural
changes during OM translocation (Benedetti et al. 1992; Duche et al. 1994). The use of an internal
disulﬁde bond, which locks the coiled-coil R-domain of ColE9 closed and so blocks Col entry
into cells and cytotoxicity (Section 4), is also consistent with the Col experiencing signiﬁcant
changes in structure in order for translocation to occur (Penfold et al. 2004b). Moreover, cell-
killing and protease protection studies on Col-treated cells have suggested that translocated Cols
not only span the cell envelope but that part of the toxin remains exposed to the external surface
during cell-killing (Benedetti et al. 1992; Beppu et al. 1972; Cramer et al. 1992; Nose & Mizuno,
1968; Zhang & Cramer, 1992). Notwithstanding these important pieces of information, there is
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
75


--- Page 20 ---
currently very little structural understanding of what a translocated Col looks like or indeed how
much of the Col moves across the membrane in order to deliver the cytotoxic domain to the
periplasm/cytoplasm. It is not inconceivable that answers to these questions will emerge in the
future since isolation of part of the translocon for ColE9, containing the Col, BtuB and OmpF,
has already been described (Housden et al. 2005).
An area of controversy in the Col ﬁeld concerns the energy dependence of the OM translo-
cation step. Since the OM is not an energized system, cellular processes requiring the input of
energy, such as the active transport of iron through siderophore receptors, rely on connection to
PMF-driven machines, the Ton system in the case of nutrient uptake. The direct relevance of
cellular PMF to Col uptake through Ton or Tol has proven diﬃcult to ascertain. Indeed, early
studies (Bourdineaud et al. 1990a) suggested that in the case of ColA the PMF was not involved
in translocation. Recently, however, Im protein-bound nuclease Cols have provided direct evi-
dence for the involvement of the PMF in the OM translocation step. Im proteins bind Col
nuclease domains with femtomolar binding aﬃnities (Section 9), which raises the key question
of how a complex that has a dissociation half-life of the order of several days at 37 xC is
dissociated at the cell surface on a timescale commensurate with cell-killing (t1=2<15 min).
Studies have now shown that not only is the Im protein released at the cell surface but this is a
PMF-dependent process.
Using an SOS–lux reporter system, James and co-workers demonstrated that translocation of
the ColE9 DNase to the cytoplasm (detected by DNA damage-induced luminescence) takes the
same amount of time whether the Im protein is bound or not (Vankemmelbeke et al. 2005),
suggesting Im protein dissociation is not rate-limiting for cell-killing. Using an EGFP–Im2
fusion as well as Western blotting, the Lloubes lab showed that the Im protein from the ColE2–
Im2 complex dissociates on the same timescale as the kinetics of cell-killing and that the full
translocon machinery is needed for the separation of Col from Im protein (Duche et al. 2006).
Using a similar approach but with Alexa594-labelled Im9 in complex with disulﬁde-locked
ColE9, James and co-workers have shown that Im dissociation at the cell surface requires
reduction of the disulﬁde implying translocon assembly is not suﬃcient for Im release but that
Col unfolding is a pre-requisite for complex dissociation (Zhang et al. 2008). Critically, they
demonstrated that ionophores which destroy the cellular PMF reduce Im release from the Col
complex at the cell surface and that a mutation within the proton-conducting path of the
TolQRA complex, which disrupts Tol function in vivo (Goemaere et al. 2007), has a similar eﬀect
(Vankemmelbeke et al. 2009). Finally, Bonsor et al. have shown that it is the contact between
TolAIII and the TAB sequence of TolB within the periplasm that is the necessary step for
enzymatic Col Im release (Bonsor et al. 2009b).
Current models suggest that the PMF across the cytoplasmic membrane is transduced
into conformational transitions within TolA through the TolQRA complex. Group A nuclease
Cols parasitize this system by promoting contact between TolA and TolB thereby promoting
Im protein dissociation at the cell surface. Several studies have begun to investigate conforma-
tional changes within the IM TolQRA complex (which has an estimated stoichiometry of
4–6:2:1; Cascales et al. 2001) and in particular the role of PMF in transmembrane interactions.
The Lloube`s lab have deployed disulﬁde cross-linking to demonstrate that dimerization
occurs between TolR molecules through their TMHs (Zhang et al. 2009a) and periplasmic
C-terminal a-helices (Goemaere et al. 2007). Cellular PMF regulates the rotation of the TMH
pairs (Zhang et al. 2009a) and conformational changes experienced by each C-terminal
helix (Goemaere et al. 2007). The latter is also regulated by speciﬁc residues in the TolQR
76
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 21 ---
ion-conducting pathway, comprised of one TolR and two TolQ TMHs. Self-association of TolQ
has also been demonstrated by cysteine scanning mutagenesis (Zhang et al. 2011). Presumably, it
is the rotation of Tol complex TMHs transduced into a conformational change in TolA that
aﬀects its interaction with the TolB/nuclease Col IUTD complex at the OM and provides the
signal for Im protein dissociation at the external surface of the cell, although how this occurs is
not known.
The Cramer lab has reported that release of the Im protein Im3 from its complex with ColE3
leads to signiﬁcant destabilization/unfolding of the nuclease and that the rRNase domain oc-
cludes voltage-gated OmpF channels in planar lipid bilayer experiments. The two observations
have been combined to suggest the destabilized rRNase is translocated through the OmpF pore
in a similar fashion to the IUTD of the Col (Zakharov et al. 2006) (Section 4). While attractive as
a mechanism for translocating the nuclease to the periplasm this model remains problematic for
several reasons. First, in other work Walker et al. found that the ColE3 rRNase domain free of
Im3 is rather a stable protein (Tmy48 xC), which has a single co-operative unfolding transition
and near UV-CD and tryptophan emission ﬂuorescence spectra all indicative of a folded domain
(Walker et al. 2004a). Second, if this were the translocation route of the nuclease it would be
expected to be used by other nuclease Cols similarly destabilized by removal of their Im protein.
Col DNases, however, are even more thermodynamically stable than the E3 rRNase domain
(in their metal bound states, van den Bremer et al. 2004) and there is currently no evidence that
DNases block OmpF pores. Third, while OmpF occlusion can be clearly linked to translocation
of the ColE3 (and ColE9) IUTD (Section 4) it remains to be shown if this also reﬂects trans-
location of the entire cytotoxic domain to the periplasm.
7. Col nuclease domain translocation across the IM and the role of
proteolytic processing
While a number of studies have suggested proteolytic cleavage of Cols occurs, the linkage of such
processing to the import mechanism itself is often less clear-cut. Cleavage by bacterial proteases
has been shown to take place at the cell surface and in the periplasm. For example, the OM
protease OmpT was reported to cleave group A Cols A, E1, E2 and E3 (Cavard & Lazdunski,
1990). Recently, ColE2 cleavage by OmpT was studied in more detail (Duche et al. 2009). In vivo
assays established that a region of the ColE2–Im2 complex is proteolytically processed at the cell
surface by OmpT leading to the release of the DNase domain. Moreover, BtuB was found to be
necessary for the cleavage to take place, and experiments with cells overproducing OmpT were
more sensitive to ColE2–Im2 treatment than Col alone. The results also suggested that Im2
protects ColE2 from proteolytic cleavage at the cell surface. It has been demonstrated recently
that while the ColD and ColE3 RNases undergo OmpT proteolytic cleavage at the cell surface,
DompT cells retain their sensitivity to both Cols, which discounts the involvement of OmpT in
the import and cytotoxicity of group A or B nuclease Cols (Chauleau et al. 2011). Cleavage in the
periplasm has been shown for a number of Cols. The group A Col ColE7 is cleaved at the
junction between the R- and DNase domains (residue 447), and this appears to be required for
import to the cytoplasm and for cytotoxicity (Shi et al. 2005). In other studies, the IM leader
protease LepB cleaves the group B Col ColD in a step that is also reported to be essential
for cytotoxicity (de Zamaroczy & Buckingham, 2002; de Zamaroczy et al. 2001). However, a
lepB-resistant mutant remains sensitive to other Cols (B, E1, E2 and E3) implying that this is a
very speciﬁc eﬀect (see below).
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
77


--- Page 22 ---
While the mechanism by which the nuclease domain of group A and group B nuclease Cols
translocate across the IM is yet to be resolved, evidence is emerging which suggests a direct
interaction of the nuclease with the membrane may play a role. The nuclease domains of both
ColE3 (rRNase) and ColE9 (DNase), which are highly basic proteins, are signiﬁcantly destabi-
lized by electrostatically driven interactions with anionic phospholipids, causing them to become
molten-globule-like, with this eﬀect inhibited by Im protein binding (Mosbahi et al. 2004, 2006).
The physiological relevance of these interactions to the IM translocation step is inferred from
two observations. The ﬁrst relates to one of the consequences of such associations for Col
DNases, which form random, non-voltage-gated channels in planar lipid bilayer experiments.
DNase channel activity is abolished by an internal disulﬁde bond within the nuclease domain that
also abolishes Col toxicity (Mosbahi et al. 2002). The second observation comes from studies
investigating the relationship between Col nuclease electrostatics and cell-killing behaviour of an
E. coli strain where the negative charge of the cytoplasmic membrane could be regulated. Walker
et al. demonstrated that a direct correlation exists between the net positive charge on the DNase
and the level of cell-killing in such a strain, with more positively charged DNases being more
eﬀective antibiotics (Walker et al. 2007).
The potential for Col nucleases to form complexes with anionic phospholipid membranes
such as the E. coli IM raises the critical question of how the Col might subsequently translocate to
the cytoplasm? One possibility that has been considered is some form of retro-translocation
through the Sec or Tat secretion pathways. However, mutations in these pathways fail to stop
Col activity suggesting that they are not the route to the cytoplasm (Walker et al. 2007). FtsH has
been identiﬁed as a potential candidate for the retro-translocation step (Fig. 9). FtsH is an
essential AAA+ ATPase/protease in the E. coli IM that degrades misfolded membrane proteins
after ﬁrst dislocating the protein to the cytoplasm in an ATP-dependent process (Ito & Akiyama,
2005). Testing an array of diﬀerent Cols with various cytotoxic activities and diﬀerent import
routes, in combination with FtsH deletion and point mutants, Walker et al. showed that FtsH is
required for the cytotoxicity of both group A and group B nuclease Cols (rRNase, tRNase and
DNase) (Walker et al. 2007). Hence, the requirement for FtsH is independent of the import route
across the OM. FtsH was, however, not required for pore-forming and peptidoglycan-cleaving
Cols, which function within the periplasm. Moreover, both protease and ATPase activities of
FtsH are required for nuclease Col toxicity.
The essential role of FtsH in the processing and translocation of ColD and ColE3 RNases has
recently been conﬁrmed by the de Zamaroczy lab who showed that FtsH is required for the
proteolytic processing of these nuclease domain as they enter the cytoplasm (Chauleau et al.
2011). In the case of ColD, FtsH processing is mediated by LepB although this appears not to
be a catalytic requirement but a structural one. However, this is not the case for ColE3 the
processing of which by FtsH is LepB independent. These distinct requirements for LepB may be
a result of the nuclease domain of ColE3 being more positively charged, and hence better able to
insert in phospholipid bilayers, than ColD (Chauleau et al. 2011).
Taken together, these experiments suggest FtsH plays an important role in the IM retro-
translocation of membrane-associated Col nuclease domains, mistaking the Col as a misfolded
membrane protein (Fig. 9). The FtsH-mediated mechanism is similar to the retro-translocation
of bacterial toxins such as the cholera toxin across the ER membrane through the ER-associated
protein degradation pathway. If this is the route across the IM for the nuclease domain it would
only require one nuclease molecule to avoid being degraded by the protease and its subsequent
refolding in the cytoplasm in order for cell-killing to proceed. There is currently, however, no
78
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 23 ---
evidence that Col nucleases can avoid being degraded by FtsH, although a number of studies
have shown that they are readily refolded from their denatured states (Ogawa et al. 1999; Walker
et al. 2003; Wallis et al. 1994).
8. Mechanism of action of enzymatic cytotoxic domain
Four enzymatic activities have been identiﬁed in Cols; DNases that target cytoplasmic
DNA (ColE2 and ColE7–ColE9), rRNases that target 16S ribosomal RNA (ColE3, E4 and
E6), tRNases that target speciﬁc tRNAs (ColE5 and D) and a phosphatase that targets pepti-
doglycan precursors in the periplasm (ColM) (Table 2). The following sections summarize the
structural biochemistry for each enzymatic class and how these toxins are thought to elicit cell
death.
Fig. 9. Hypothetical model depicting retro-translocation of a Col nuclease domain across the E. coli cyto-
plasmic membrane. Although the model incorporates observations on several Cols, as described in the text,
the ﬁgure highlights work on group A nucleases such as ColE3, ColE7 and ColE9. Step 1, electrostatically
driven interaction between the Col nuclease domain and the anionic phospholipid bilayer of the cytoplasmic
membrane; Step 2, destabilization of the nuclease domain (the DNase of ColE9 is shown) to form a molten-
globule; Step 3, retro-translocation of the destabilized nuclease domain via the cytoplasmic AAA+ ATPase
domain of FtsH followed by proteolytic processing. FtsH normally degrades proteins down to peptides, the
mechanism by which Col nucleases avoid complete degradation remains unknown. Step 4, refolding of a
single Col nuclease in the cytoplasm; Step 5, folded and functional Col nuclease attacks its cellular nucleic
acid target, in this instance the E. coli chromosome.
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
79


--- Page 24 ---
8.1 DNase Cols
Col DNases are divalent metal ion-dependent enzymes that randomly degrade DNA (Table 2).
Sequence similarity in the C-terminal 134 amino acid domains of the four E Col DNases that
Table 2. The catalytic activities of enzymatic Cols.
aNg et al. (2010b).
bOgawa et al. (2006).
cTomita et al. (2000).
dDoudeva et al. (2006).
ePommer et al. (2001).
fEl Ghachi et al. (2006).
80
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 25 ---
have been identiﬁed to date (E2 and E7–E9) ranges from 70 to 80%. The ColE7 and E9 DNase
domains in complex with DNA and metal ions have been reported which provide a structural
foundation for understanding the mechanism of dsDNA hydrolysis (Doudeva et al. 2006; Hsia
et al. 2004; Mate & Kleanthous, 2004) (Fig. 10a). The core of the active site of Col DNases is the
H-N-H motif located at the C-terminus of the protein sequence. This y34-amino-acid-long
motif contains four conserved histidine residues some of which chelate a single metal ion to
catalyse DNA hydrolysis. The H-N-H motif is widespread in metal-ﬁnger nucleases across all
kingdoms of life (Gorbalenya, 1994; Keeble et al. 2005; Shub et al. 1994). They are divided into
four sub-groups: bacterial toxins, homing endonucleases, restriction/repair enzymes and heli-
cases/reverse transcriptases, with homing enzymes being the largest subgroup (Galburt &
Stoddard, 2002). The H-N-H motif is also structurally related to the ‘bba-Me’ motif (Kuhlmann
et al. 1999) found in such nucleases as I-PpoI from Physarum polycephalum, Serratia nuclease
from Serratia marcescens, Vvn from Vibrio vulniﬁcus and the Holliday junction-resolving enzyme T4
endo VII.
The ColE9 DNase has been shown to preferentially cleave dsDNA after thymine, but with
little cleavage speciﬁcity exhibited for ssDNA and ssRNA (Pommer et al. 2001). Optimal activity
of E9 DNase against dsDNA has been reported in the presence of millimolar concentrations of
Mg2+ or Ca2+ while transition metals such as Ni2+ and Co2+ are preferred for ssDNA hydrolysis.
Cleavage of ssRNA appears not to be metal dependent. Somewhat diﬀerent results have been
obtained for the closely related ColE7 DNase that is reported to cleave dsDNA in the presence
of Zn2+ (which by contrast is inhibitory for the E9 DNase) and ssDNA in the presence of Zn2+
and Ni+ (Doudeva et al. 2006).
The structure of the E9 DNase bound to dsDNA in the presence of Zn2+ or Mg2+ ions
(Fig. 10a) shows that the architecture of the E9 DNase active site does not change upon binding
to the minor groove of substrate DNA (Mate & Kleanthous, 2004). However, the DNA be-
comes distorted, which positions a single scissile phosphodiester bond close to the divalent
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10. (a) ColE9 DNase domain bound to the minor groove of dsDNA (PDB ID: 1V14) highlighting the
active site H-N-H motif (cyan), along with two of the motif’s characteristic histidine residues, and its bound
metal ion. (b) ColE3 rRNase domain (red) bound to the A-site of the E. coli 70S ribosome in which is also
bound mRNA (black) and P- (light grey) and E-site (dark grey) tRNAs (PDB ID: 2XFZ and 2XG0).
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
81


--- Page 26 ---
cation in the active site. Widening and bending of the dsDNA groove has also been observed in
other structures of similar enzymes containing the V-shaped active site characteristic of the H-N-
H motif, such as I-PpoI and Vvn, as well as in the E7 DNase (Hsia et al. 2004). Interestingly, the
same nucleic acid interactions are made regardless of which metal ion is bound. The Mg2+ ion is
coordinated by two histidine residues within the H-N-H motif (His102 and His127 in E9 DNase,
numbering of isolated domain), while Zn2+ binding also recruits a third histidine, His131, which
is thought to explain the lack of enzymatic activity of the E9 DNase in the presence of zinc. It
has been proposed that His103 serves as a general base, with the role of the Mg2+ ion being to
polarize the scissile phosphate, stabilize the transition state (TS) and activate the hydrolytic water
molecule (Pommer et al. 2001).
It is yet to be established how Col DNases result in cell death since the single-strand nicks to
dsDNA caused by the enzyme could be repaired by the DNA repair machinery of the cell.
Indeed, DNase Cols are known to induce the SOS response in E. coli that repairs DNA damage
(Walker et al. 2004b). Cell death likely results either because the nicking activity of the Col DNase
overwhelms the repair machinery of the cell or random nicking of the genome occasionally
produces lethal double-strand breaks.
8.2 rRNase Cols
Col E3, the ﬁrst of the rRNase Cols to be isolated (Herschman & Helinski, 1967), cleaves a single
phosphodiester bond between A1493 and G1494 in helix 44 of 16S rRNA at the decoding
(A-site) in the 30S subunit (Table 2) (Senior & Holland, 1971). The exact mechanism by which
this cleavage inhibits translation has until recently proven enigmatic. Detailed investigations from
the Rodnina lab (Lancaster et al. 2008), using a variety of steady-state and pre-steady approaches,
showed that cleavage aﬀects predominantly the elongation step of translation, while the rate of
initiation slows down and becomes less eﬃcient. ColE3 cleavage inhibits peptide bond forma-
tion and translocation but its main perturbation is on the decoding step of elongation, consistent
with its cleavage of the phosphodiester bond adjacent to the critical decoding nucleotides A1492
and A1493. In addition, ColE3-mediated cleavage reduces the stability of the codon–recognition
complex and the rate of accommodation of amino acyl-tRNA in the A-site decreases y200-fold.
Accumulation of those two eﬀects results in production of short peptides by ColE3-cleaved
ribosomes that ultimately leads to cell death.
The 32 A˚ resolution structure of the E3 rRNase bound to Thermus thermophilus 70S ribosome
in complex with mRNA and tRNAs (Fig. 10b) sheds light on the high speciﬁcity and mechanism
of RNA cleavage (Ng et al. 2010a). The ColE3 rRNase binds to the decoding A-site of the 30S
subunit with a topology similar to the anticodon stem-loop of tRNA, contacting one 30S subunit
protein, S12, via its N-terminus. When bound to its Im protein, the N-terminal residues of the
E3 rRNase form an a-helix, while in the ribosome they form a pseudo-b-sheet that makes
extensive hydrogen bonding with S12 residues. No major global changes occur in the 70S
ribosome as a result of E3 rRNase binding and cleavage. However, the decoding site adopts
an open conformation characteristic of an empty 30S subunit in which nucleotide G530 is in a syn
conformation and helix 69 of the 23S rRNA undergoes a minor change in conformation. The
crystal structure of the E3 rRNase bound to the 70S ribosome represents the post-cleavage state
since the bond between A1493 (3k-terminal 2k,3k-cyclic phosphate) and G1494 (free 5k hydroxyl
group) was hydrolysed even though mutants inactive in cell-killing assays were used in the
crystallization experiments. While the 3k-16S rRNA product fragment does not change
82
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 27 ---
conformation, A1492 and A1493 in the 5k end get pushed towards the E3 rRNase with which
they form a number of interactions. Based on the structure and previously published data, a
cleavage mechanism was proposed in which His58 and Glu62 form a catalytic general acid–base
pair, while Asp55 and Glu60 provide additional stabilization of the TS (Ng et al. 2010a). The
structure of the E3 rRNase–70S product complex is consistent with the biochemical data on the
eﬀects of 16S rRNA cleavage; slowing down/halting protein synthesis is due to increased
ﬂexibility in the decoding centre with consequent defects in the acceptance of amino acyl-
tRNAs.
8.3 tRNase Cols
Cols E5 and D cleave single phosphodiester bonds in the anticodon loops of speciﬁc tRNAs
which ultimately arrests protein synthesis (Table 2). ColE5 cleaves the Q(G)34pU35p dinucleotide
at the anticodon triplet of tRNATyr, tRNAHis, tRNAAsn and tRNAAsp (Ogawa et al. 2006), while
ColD cleaves between nucleotides 38 and 39 in at least 3 of the 4 tRNAArg (ICG, U*CU,CCU)
(Tomita et al. 2000). Cols E5 and D have similar folds; however, their substrate recognition
mechanism and active sites are diﬀerent. They contain mainly b-sheets and are structurally similar
to the toxin RelE and the ribonucleases 1. ColE5, which is unique among ribonuclease in not
having any histidine residues, cleaves the phosphodiester bond between Q34 and U35 on the 3k
side of the wobble position (Ogawa et al. 1999). Based on the crystal structure, mutational
analysis and docking experiments, tRNA cleavage has been proposed in which Asp46 acts as a
general base, activating the 2k-OH group at the position 34, while Arg48 stabilizes the TS (Lin
et al. 2005). ColD has one histidine residue (His611) the mutation of which abolishes ColD
cytotoxic activity (Tomita et al. 2000). Based on the structure of ColD in complex with ImD, two
other residues, Lys608 and Lys610, were proposed to be involved in the cleavage reaction
(Graille et al. 2004). Both ColD and ColE5 give rise to the same reaction products, which are
5k-hydroxyl and 2k,3k-cyclic phosphate (Ogawa et al. 1999; Tomita et al. 2000).
8.4 Peptidoglycan hydrolase Col
ColM aﬀects peptidoglycan biogenesis by hydrolysing lipid intermediates I and II between C55
and pyrophosphoryl groups thereby inhibiting peptidoglycan and O-antigen synthesis (Table 2).
Products of the cleavage reaction are undecaprenol (C55-OH) and either 1-pyrophospho-
MurNAc-pentapeptide or 1-pyrophospho-MurNAc(pentapeptide)-GlcNAc (El Ghachi et al.
2006). Based on previously published inactivating point mutants, along with sequence alignment
data of Col M homologues, Barreteau et al. identiﬁed 20 putative active side residues (Barreteau et
al. 2010). Enzymatic activity of single alanine mutants at these sites was examined using in vivo
and in vitro assays. Five residues (Asp229, His235, Asp226, Tyr228 and Arg236), which are all
essential for ColM activity, cluster at the surface of the Col and likely comprise the ligand-binding
and catalytic sites.
It has been shown that the antibacterial activity of ColM depends on the periplasmic cha-
perone FkpA (Hullmann et al. 2008). Periplasmic chaperones aid in folding of OM proteins and
prevent aggregation of misfolded periplasmic proteins. ColM is inactive against fkpA E. coli cells,
as well as four fpkA mutants. Denatured ColM regains its cytotoxic activity when incubated with
puriﬁed FpkA, suggesting FkpA helps in ColM refold in the periplasm following translocation
through OM (Hullmann et al. 2008). Conversely, other groups have shown that the isolated
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
83


--- Page 28 ---
C-terminal enzymatic domain does not require FkpA for activity in vivo (Barneoud-Arnoulet et al.
2010a; Barreteau et al. 2010).
9. Protein–protein interaction studies of the Col endonuclease–Im
protein complex
Im proteins inhibit the nuclease domains of Cols through two distinct modes of action; direct
occlusion of the enzyme active site (tRNase-speciﬁc Im proteins Im5 and ImD) or indirect
occlusion of nucleic acid binding through association with an Im protein exosite (IPE) adjacent
to the active site (DNase-speciﬁc Im9 and rRNase-speciﬁc Im3, for example). Below we review
the extensive biophysical, structural and computational analyses of Col DNase–Im protein
complexes, which have proven to be a powerful model system for investigating speciﬁcity in
protein–protein interactions. We also review less extensive work on the ColE3 rRNase–Im3
complex.
9.1 Kinetic and thermodynamic analyses of Col DNase–Im protein association
The complexes between Col DNases and their cognate Im proteins are ultra-high aﬃnity and so
the exploration of the corresponding binding constants has been performed predominantly
through kinetic studies employing stopped-ﬂow tryptophan ﬂuorescence. Both ColE2 DNase–
Im2 (Li et al. 2004) and ColE9 DNase–Im9 (Wallis et al. 1995) complexes associate by a diﬀusion-
limited, bimolecular collision (of the order of 108–109 Mx1 sx1 at pH 7, 25 xC and in 200 mM
salt) resulting in the formation of an encounter complex NI*, where N is the nuclease and I the
inhibitor (Eq. 1):
N+I Ð
k1
kx1 NI* Ð
k2
kx2 NI
(1)
Electrostatics play a signiﬁcant role in the formation of NI* as demonstrated by the strong
dependence of the association rates (k1) on the ionic strength. The encounter complex subse-
quently collapses to the stable complex NI (Eq. 1) in a second slower phase which, it has been
argued, represents rigid body rotation of the Im protein on the DNase surface (Keeble &
Kleanthous, 2005). There are no gross changes in conformation in either protein on forming the
complex. In the case of the ColE3 rRNase–Im3 complex (Walker et al. 2003), a single phase is
observed in stopped-ﬂow tryptophan ﬂuorescence experiments, attributed to the rapid bimole-
cular association between the two proteins which is not accompanied by any conformational
changes. The resulting kinetically derived equilibrium dissociation constants for nuclease–Im
protein complexes are all in the femtomolar region (007x20r10x15 M), depending on the
ionic strength (Li et al. 2004; Walker et al. 2003; Wallis et al. 1995).
Arrhenius analysis of the observed rate constants for the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex re-
vealed that low activation barriers for the bimolecular association and the subsequent con-
formational rearrangement are favoured both by low enthalpy and positive entropy values while
the dissociation of the encounter complex is slow mainly due to large negative activation entropy
(Wallis et al. 1995). A similar trend is seen in the case of the ColE3 rRNase–Im3 complex for the
bimolecular association and dissociation steps (Walker et al. 2003). A large positive entropy
change favours the observed femtomolar binding constant as revealed by Van’t Hoﬀanalysis of
the kinetically determined Kd values in the case of the ColE9–Im9 complex. This entropy change
84
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 29 ---
must be associated with changes in the solvation entropy of the two proteins upon association
(Wallis et al. 1995). On the other hand, a large negative enthalpy change favours the formation of
the ColE3 rRNase–Im3 complex, which is associated with a signiﬁcant number of intermolecular
hydrogen bonds formed upon association of the two proteins (Carr et al. 2000; Walker et al.
2003).
Kinetically determined enthalpy changes that occur upon formation of the ColE9 DNase–Im9
and ColE3 rRNase–Im3 complexes have been veriﬁed by ITC (Keeble et al. 2006; Walker et al.
2003). Calorimetric analysis of all four cognate DNase–Im complexes shows that binding is
enthalpically driven (x331, x303, x242 and x105 kcal/mole, respectively). In the case of
the ColE2, ColE7, ColE8 DNase complexes binding is entropically disfavoured (–135, x105
and x44 kcal/mol, respectively), while for the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex binding is en-
tropically favoured (+81 kcal/mole) (Keeble et al. 2006). These observations are consistent with
the greater polarity of the Im protein complexes of ColE2, ColE7 and ColE8 DNases and in
contrast to the ColE9 DNase–Im9 interface, which is more hydrophobic. In accordance with the
observed large negative values (ranging between x045 and x082 kcal molx1 Kx1) for the
association heat capacity, binding of the ColE2, ColE7 and ColE8 DNases with their cognate Im
partners is accompanied by a strong rigidiﬁcation of one or both counterparts while in the case
of the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex association is coupled to a signiﬁcant expulsion of interfacial
water (Keeble et al. 2006).
9.2 A dual-recognition mechanism underpins binding specificity in Col DNase–Im
protein complexes
Exosite binding of Im proteins has driven an evolutionary arms race between Col-producing
bacteria, allowing extensive sequence variation at the Col DNase–Im interface (Kleanthous &
Walker, 2001). The manifestation of this diversiﬁcation is the ten-orders-of-magnitude range of
binding aﬃnities that have been recorded among cognate and non-cognate Col DNase–Im
protein complexes (Li et al. 2004). This, in turn, has provided a powerful model system with
which to explore the determinants of binding speciﬁcity more generically in protein–protein
interactions.
The majority of studies aimed at investigating Col DNase–Im protein complexes have focused
primarily on how the Im protein binds and recognizes the DNase speciﬁcally. These studies have
proposed that a dual-recognition mechanism underpins binding speciﬁcity wherein the bulk of
complex stabilization emanates from conserved hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions
between Col DNase IPE residues and a hotspot of conserved Im residues in helix a3 (shown in
Fig. 11a for the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex). These contacts are present in both cognate
(ColE7 DNase–Im7 (Ko et al. 1999) and ColE9 DNase–Im9 (Kuhlmann et al. 2000; Montalvao
et al. 2008)) and non-cognate (ColE9 DNase–Im2) (Li et al. 1998, 2004) complexes. The stability
enhancement in the case of the cognate complexes stems from interactions between charged or
hydrophobic residues of Im helix a2 (shown in Fig. 11a for the ColE9–Im9 complex) and
residues of identical chemical nature in the DNase IPE (Kuhlmann et al. 2000). In the case of the
non-cognate complexes, the presence of residues of non-identical chemical nature between
Im helix a2 and the DNase destabilizes the complex, which play a critical role in determining the
7–10-orders-of-magnitude diﬀerence in aﬃnities between cognate and non-cognate complexes
(Kuhlmann et al. 2000; Wallis et al. 1998). In order to confer speciﬁcity to the DNase, only a small
number of Im helix a2 residues need vary without concomitant alteration of helix a3 core
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
85


--- Page 30 ---
F86
Y54
Y55
D33
N34
L33
V34
Y83
F86
T29
K97
N75
V98
Y54
Y55
D33
N34
N72
D62
V37
I53
E41
E30
R54
D51
helix α3
α1-α2 loop
α3–α4 loop
helix α2
Y83
F86
T27
K97
N75
V98
Y54
Y55
L33
V34
N72
D62
V37
I53
E41
D51
E30
R54
helix α3
α1-α2 loop
α3–α4 loop
helix α2
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 11. For legend see following page.
86
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 31 ---
interactions, which facilitates the diversiﬁcation and evolution of Im speciﬁcity without compro-
mising the ability of the Im protein to inactivate the toxin (Kuhlmann et al. 2000; Meenan et al.
2010).
9.3 The cognate ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex
An alanine scan of ColE9 DNase IPE interfacial residues, where the DDG of Im9 binding
between the ColE9 mutants and the wild-type (WT)-ColE9 was determined computationally and
experimentally using stopped-ﬂow ﬂuorescence kinetics, revealed that the eﬀect of the IPE
residues on Im9 binding is not as extensive as that of the hotspot residues in Im9 (Keeble et al.
2008; Kuhlmann et al. 2000). The scan showed four ColE9 DNase IPE residues (Asn75, Phe86,
Lys97 and Val98; isolated domain numbering) create a speciﬁcity hotspot for the DNase which
form a central belt at the interface of the ColE9–Im9 complex (Fig. 11a). Phe86 is coordinated
by the conserved Tyr54 and Tyr55 of Im9 helix a3 and the speciﬁcity Im9 helix a2 residues
Val34 and Val37 while Lys97 and Val98 interact with Glu41 and Val34 of Im9 helix a2,
respectively (Kuhlmann et al. 2000). The F86A ColE9 DNase mutant exhibited the greatest
DDG for Im9 binding of all four hotspot alanine variants. Structural and double-mutant cycle
(DMC) analyses (experimental and computational) for the F86A mutant binding Im9 (V34A,
V37A, Y54A and Y55A) and Im2 mutants (D33A, N34A, V37A, Y54A and Y55A) were per-
formed. This conﬁrmed the importance of Tyr54 and Tyr55 in the stability of cognate and non-
cognate complexes alike but also showed minimal coupling between Phe86 and Im9 residues
(with the speciﬁcity residues exhibiting greater interaction than Tyr54 and Tyr55). Negative
DMC values were obtained for Im2 speciﬁcity residues relative to Phe86, the alanine substitu-
tions of these Im2 residues relieving the instability conferred to the ColE9 DNase–Im2 complex
by the WT residues (see below). Phe86 is conserved between the DNase of ColE2 and ColE9
(the corresponding speciﬁcity residue in ColE7 and ColE8 is a lysine) while Asn75 is conserved
Fig. 11. Dual-recognition underpins binding speciﬁcity in Col DNase–Im protein complexes. (a) Cognate
complex of the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex (Kdy10x14 M). In ColE9 DNase (green), the IPE residues
PDB ID 1EMV (Asn75, Phe86, Lys97, Val98; isolated domain numbering) (red) form a central belt at the
binding interface where mutation to alanine has the largest impact on the binding free energy (DDG). At the
centre of this belt Phe86 stacks with the conserved Im9 helix a3 (purple) residue Tyr54 and is surrounded
by the variable Im9 helix a2 hydrophobic residues (purple) Leu33, Val34 and Val37 and Ile53. Additional
stabilizing interactions are made by Im9 helix a3 residues Asp51 and Tyr55. Further speciﬁcity interactions
made between E9 DNase Lys97 and Val98 with Im9 residues Glu41 and Val34, respectively. E9 DNase
Arg54, at the periphery of the IPE, forms a salt bridge with Glu30 of Im9 helix a2. Asn75, the only
completely conserved interfacial residue on the DNase IPE, participates in a water-mediated hydrogen
bond to the Im9 backbone. Also shown are residues within two critical loops of Im9 (a1–a2, a3–a4),
which are thought to contribute to binding speciﬁcity. (b) The non-cognate ColE9 DNase–Im2 complex
(Kdy10x7 M) (PDB ID 2WPT). The key interactions from Im2 helix a3 (Tyr54, Tyr55 and Asp51) that
surround the E9 DNase IPE residue Phe86 are maintained, including the stacking interaction with Tyr54.
The strength of Im protein helix a3 hotspot (which also involves several interfacial water molecules, not
shown) results in unfavourable packing between Phe86 and Asp33 and Asn34 causing frustration at the
interface. Also evident are the changes in loop conformation in Im2 relative to Im9 (a1–a2, a3–a4 loops)
that aﬀect the interactions of other E9 DNase IPE residues, particularly Tyr83 and Asn72. (c) Comparison
of cognate and non-cognate packing interactions at the core of the ColE9 DNase–Im protein interface. The
ﬁgure emphasizes the chemical frustration that results from the juxtaposition of charged and polar residues
in Im2 (Asp33 and Asn34, respectively) with E9 DNase Phe86, which destabilize the stability of the
complex.
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
87


--- Page 32 ---
among all DNases. The rest of the hotspot IPE residues are variable. Accordingly, Col DNase–
Im speciﬁcity is dictated by the conserved elements of the IPE and buﬀered by variable residues
(Keeble et al. 2008).
The conformation and dynamics of the ColE9 DNase–Im9 cognate complex and the individual
proteins have recently been studied through MD simulations (Baron et al. 2008). In this study, the
conformational entropy of Im9 was demonstrated to be substantially decreased upon binding the
Col, with the ﬂexibility of the latter only increasing at the binding interface. In accordance with
the crystal structure of the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex, the MD simulations were consistent
with conformational sampling of residues 54–64 in Im9 (involving the a2–a3 loop) and helix a3
along with the conserved hotspot residues Tyr54 and Ty55 at the binding interface.
9.4 The non-cognate ColE9 DNase–Im2 complex
Further insight into the dual-recognition mechanism underpinning Col DNase–Im protein com-
plex speciﬁcity emerged from the recent crystal structure of the non-cognate ColE9 DNase–Im2
complex (Meenan et al. 2010) (Fig. 11b). Previous attempts at obtaining a structure for a non-
cognate complex, which typically have Kd’s in the mM–nM range, had been hampered by
the rotational dynamics which are thought to be intrinsic to non-cognate complexes. Meenan
et al. employed NMR-based docking restraints as a guide to place cysteine residues across the
protein–protein interface in order to trap and crystallize the E9 DNase–Im2 complex, which is
seven-orders-of-magnitude weaker binding than the E9 DNase–Im9 complex and eight-orders-
of-magnitude weaker than the E2 DNase–Im2 complex. Surprisingly, the resulting high-
resolution structure showed an interface devoid of a covalent bond; the engineered disulﬁde
merely stabilized the crystal lattice, with the non-cognate interface formed between neighbour-
ing, covalently attached complexes.
The binding interface for the non-cognate E9 DNase–Im2 complex localizes to the ColE9
DNase IPE (Phe86), with Im2 anchored through the conserved helix a3 residues Tyr54, Tyr55
and Asp51, in good agreement with the structure of the cognate ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex.
Tyr54 (Im2) and Phe86 (ColE9 DNase) are aromatically stacked and present helix a2 N-terminal
residues of Im2 to the interface in a fashion similar to that seen in the cognate complex (Fig. 11b).
Computational alanine scanning of non-cognate interfacial residues using the program Rosetta
design conﬁrmed the conserved hotspot residues Tyr54, Tyr55 and Phe86 are all highly stabi-
lizing in the non-cognate complex (Meenan et al. 2010).
Despite these similarities the non-cognate complex is signiﬁcantly less stable than the cognate
due to a series of destabilizing contacts that dictate the binding speciﬁcity. A hydrophobic
interaction in the cognate complex between E9 DNase Phe86 and the speciﬁcity helix a2 re-
sidues Leu33 and Val34 of Im9 is switched to a charged-hydrophobic interaction in the ColE9
DNase–Im2 complex (Fig. 11b). The resulting unfavourable packing between E9 DNase Phe86
with Asp33 and Asn34 of Im2 is highly destabilizing as evidenced by the enhancement in binding
aﬀorded by alanine mutations (Keeble et al. 2008) and the even greater enhancement (up to
10 000-fold) in binding when Asp33 and Asn34 are substituted for their Im9 counterparts,
leucine and valine (Keeble et al. 2008; Meenan et al. 2010). The destabilizing interactions of Im2
Asp33 and Asn34 are maintained in the non-cognate complex at signiﬁcant energetic cost
through the highly stabilizing interactions surrounding ColE9 DNase Phe86 at the centre of the
interface. These are largely through the conserved residues of helix a3 of Im2 and aided by many
conserved hydrogen bonds mediated by interfacial water molecules. As a consequence, the
88
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 33 ---
non-cognate complex experiences ‘frustration’ through the juxtaposition of non-optimal con-
tacts (Fig. 10c) (Meenan et al. 2010). It is the relief of this frustration that provides the large
enhancements in binding that result from single mutations at the Col DNase–Im protein inter-
face. The eﬀect of such a single mutation in vivo can be appreciated by the data in Fig. 12, which
show the relationship between binding aﬃnity of ColE9 DNase–Im protein complexes and the
degree of cell protection aﬀorded by the same Im protein when expressed in E. coli (Li et al.
2004). Not only do these data emphasize the wide range of binding aﬃnities observed in Col
DNase–Im protein complexes, but they also strikingly show how a single mutation within the
speciﬁcity helix a2 (Asp33 to Leu33 in Im2) results in a suﬃciently large improvement in binding
free energy as to confer resistance towards the Col and hence survival of the bacterial culture.
The signiﬁcance of the a1–a2 and a3–a4 loops in contributing to Im2 binding speciﬁcity was
also highlighted by the ColE9 DNase–Im2 crystal structure. Thr27 in the Im9 a1–a2 loop and
ColE9 DNase Tyr83 form hydrogen bonds but they are not aligned optimally in the non-cognate
complex because of an intervening water molecule. The same occurs between Asp62 of the a3–
a4 loop and ColE9 DNase Asn72. An important consequence of the non-optimal placement of
the a1–a2 loop is that this aﬀects the interactions with the E9 DNase hotspot residue Tyr83
Fig. 12. Dual-recognition underpins evolution and diversity of Col DNase–Im protein complex
protein–protein interaction speciﬁcity. Adapted from Li et al. (2004) with permission from Elsevier. The
ﬁgure shows the relationship between in vivo survival of E. coli K-12 cells expressing imm9, non-cognate Im
genes or im9 chimeras/mutant genes when challenged with ColE9 and the equilibrium Kd for the same Im
protein binding the ColE9 DNase domain in vitro. Col resistance was scored for each construct using an
overlay plate assay in the presence (ﬁlled symbols) or absence (open symbols) of the inducer IPTG.
Examples of the same construct ¡IPTG are indicated with squares and triangles. Cells become completely
resistant towards ColE9 even in the absence of inducer (due to leaky expression from the pTrc99a plasmid
used in these experiments) when harbouring an Im protein with an aﬃnity for the E9 DNase of greater than
10x10 M, but are eradicated when the aﬃnity falls below 10x6 M. Hence, the evolution of novel ColE9 Im
protein speciﬁcity in nature likely occurs within this aﬃnity window (pink shading). The frustration of side-
chain interactions at the heart of the dual-recognition mechanism primes the interface for high-aﬃnity
binding so that a single mutation (in this instance an Asp-to-Leu mutation at position 33 of Im2) yields an
Im protein that completely protects the cell from the Col (see Fig. 11c) (Meenan et al. 2010). Further
enhancements in binding come from additional residues in the Im protein speciﬁcity helix a2, contributions
from loop regions and interfacial water molecules (see text for details).
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
89


--- Page 34 ---
(Fig. 11a, b) (Kuhlmann et al. 2000; Meenan et al. 2010). Although not directly involved in
binding the ColE9 DNase, residues within the a1–a2 loop of Im9 have been shown to be
involved in deﬁning Im9 speciﬁcity relative to Im7 (see below). The ﬂexibility of the Im9 helix-
spanning loops and the signiﬁcance of their conﬁguration to ColE9 DNase binding were also
demonstrated in an MD simulation study of the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex (Baron et al. 2008).
Apart from the destabilizing interference in the Im2 loop conﬁguration, water molecules help
oﬀset several unfavourable interactions at the interface, centred around variable speciﬁcity re-
sidues. For this reason, more water is found at the interface of the non-cognate complex. It has
been suggested that the exclusion of this water from the cognate interface would lead to a higher
aﬃnity through the gained desolvation entropy, which is consistent with the available calori-
metric data (Meenan et al. 2010). Essentially complementing the observations of the ColE9
DNase–Im9 cognate complex, the ColE9 DNase–Im2 non-cognate complex further illustrates
that the dual recognition mechanism in this protein–protein interaction relies on highly stabi-
lizing interactions emanating from the conserved elements of the Col DNase–Im interface that
are modulated by the surrounding variable residues of Im helix a2. The structure further shows
the importance of interhelical loop conﬁgurations and buried interfacial water molecules in
encoding Im protein speciﬁcity (Meenan et al. 2010).
9.5 Evolution and design of Col DNase–Im protein complexes
Protein drugs are ﬁnding increasing use in medicine but their potential for oﬀ-target eﬀects can
have disastrous consequences (Hale, 2006; Kiely & Johnson, 2002; Oldham & Dillman, 2008).
Hence, a major objective in the study of protein–protein interactions is the ability to engineer the
aﬃnity and binding speciﬁcity of interacting pairs. In recent years, directed evolution and com-
putational design have both had signiﬁcant impact in this area (Khersonsky et al. 2006; Pokala &
Handel, 2001; Tokuriki & Tawﬁk, 2009). The rational design of novel speciﬁcities in protein
complexes relies on the inspection of the protein structure and its in silico perturbation through
the introduction of substitutions at speciﬁc locations which are then computationally screened
for the change in complex stability (Kortemme et al. 2004). Directed evolution enables speciﬁcity
alterations to emerge in in vitro evolution experiments that mimic natural evolution and is based
on the use of an appropriate selection pressure (Roodveldt et al. 2005). Both approaches have
been applied in the exploration of novel protein–protein interaction speciﬁcities in Col DNase–
Im protein complexes, which are ideally suited for these applications for a number of reasons.
First, the aﬃnities of cognate complexes are high (femtomolar) while the level of discrimination
between cognate and non-cognate pairs can approach y10-orders of magnitude in binding
aﬃnity (Li et al. 2004), essentially matching the spectrum of Kd’s observed in nature. Second,
crystal structures of cognate (ColE9 DNase–Im9 and ColE7 DNase–Im7), and non-cognate
(ColE9 DNase–Im2) provide a structural framework for understanding binding speciﬁcity (Ko
et al. 1999; Kuhlmann et al. 2000; Meenan et al. 2010). Third, the cytotoxicity of Cols provides an
assay (both in vivo and in vitro) for screening, selecting and analysing viable alterations in speciﬁcity
(Kortemme et al. 2004; Levin et al. 2009). Fourth, the metal dependence of Col DNase activity
provides a route by which nuclease activity can be readily activated (Levin et al. 2009). Recent
advances using both approaches are discussed.
In vitro compartmentalization (IVC) was used by the Tawﬁk lab to evolve Im9 towards Im of
the ColE7 DNase to which Im9 binds y6-orders of magnitude more weakly than to ColE9
(Bernath et al. 2005; Levin et al. 2009; Li et al. 2004). In each round of selection y1010 Im9
90
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 35 ---
variants were generated (with a single gene/droplet of the emulsion) and compartmentalized
with the ColE7 DNase, which was activated by the addition of Co2+ ions after the Im genes were
transcribed and translated. Active inhibitors encoded by genes that survived the ColE7 nuclease
activity were recovered and PCR ampliﬁed. Im9 variants exhibiting increased ColE7 inhibition
relative to WT-Im9 were isolated after eight rounds of mutation and selection (Bernath et al.
2005; Levin et al. 2009). In order to increase the aﬃnity of the evolving Im9 towards ColE7 while
also reducing the cross-reactivity with ColE9 an inactive variant of the ColE9 DNase, bearing the
H103A active site mutation (Section 8), was added for three additional rounds of selection (Levin
et al. 2009). The inactive ColE9 DNase provided a negative selection for ColE9 DNase cross-
binders thereby enhancing ColE7 DNase speciﬁcity. The authors of this study analysed emerging
speciﬁcity variants and managed to solve structures for some of these to provide a molecular
picture of the evolutionary process.
Of the selected ColE7 DNase binding ‘nevIm7’ variants only one mutation in the variable
region of Im9 helix a2 (V34D) increased directly the aﬃnity of Im9 towards ColE7 (Fig. 13a, b).
Asp34 (the cognate residue in Im7) interacts with Lys528 and Lys537 in ColE7 switching a
hydrophobic interaction in the ColE9 DNase–Im9 complex into an electrostatic one in the
newly evolved ColE7 DNase–nevIm7 complex (Levin et al. 2009). The only other mutations that
increase the aﬃnity towards ColE7 were in residues of the a1–a2 loop (N24D, D26N, T27A
and S28T) lying close to the variable region (Fig. 13a, b). These, however, were not previously
seen to be involved in binding and the substituted amino acids were not identical to those in Im7.
In the structures of Im9 and Im7 in complex with their cognate enzymes the Im proteins are
rotated 19o around the Tyr54–Tyr55 (Im9) or Tyr55–Tyr56 (Im7) hotspot (Kuhlmann et al.
2000). In the case of nevIm7, the emerging a1–a2 loop mutations (N24D, D26N, T27A and
S28T) resulted in an intermediate conﬁguration between these two rotameric forms (Fig. 13b).
This intermediate conﬁguration resulted in a 10–30-fold aﬃnity increase of nevIm7 towards the
ColE7 DNase relative to Im9 by reduction of the dissociation rate constant as observed by
stopped-ﬂow ﬂuorescence kinetic measurements (Levin et al. 2009). Notably, even two of these
a1–a2 loop mutations could confer the observed aﬃnity increase although none of them is
involved directly in binding. Asn24 has a critical role in this switch; when mutated to aspartic
acid in nevIm7 it becomes part of the a1–a2 loop whereas in Im9 it forms the C-terminus of a1
helix (Fig. 13a, b). The altered conﬁguration leads to latent interactions between pre-existing
residues (salt bridges between Glu30 and Asp51 of Im9 with Arg520, Gln532, Thr531 of the
ColE7 DNase) which are not possible for wild-type (WT) Im9 a1–a2 loop residues (Levin et al.
2009). These data complement the studies of Meenan et al. on the non-cognate ColE9 DNase–
Im2 complex, described above, where again a1–a2 loop residues are implicated in contributing
to binding speciﬁcity (Fig. 13b) (Meenan et al. 2010).
The combination of V34D and the four a1–a2 loop mutations resulted in higher aﬃnity
for the nevIm7 towards the ColE7 DNase but also decreased the stability of the new Im
proteins (determined by urea denaturation experiments and intrinsic tryptophan ﬂuorescence).
Extending the selection for ColE7 DNase by three more rounds resulted in the V37I mutation
(Fig. 13b), which improved packing between helices a1 and a3 and recovered this lost stability.
The nevIm7 variants isolated up to this point all exhibited equal aﬃnity for both ColE7 and
ColE9; in other words, they reduced ColE9 DNase and increased ColE7 DNase binding but
with no increase in selectivity. Following the incorporation of the negative selection step the
selectivity for ColE7 increased relative to ColE9 by 30–70-fold. Variants emerging from these
rounds contained the E41G mutation (Fig. 13b) which when combined with V37I led to
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
91


--- Page 36 ---
molecules of adequate stability that conferred Im to ColE7 in in vivo cell-killing assays (Levin et al.
2009).
The Baker lab have deployed computational redesign of the ColE7 DNase–Im7 interface as a
test of how robust such computational methods can be in generating novel (and predictable)
speciﬁcities at protein–protein interfaces. In a ﬁrst approach, the binding interface was
12
N
C
44
50
77
α3
α2
α1
α4
23
30
34
37
41
55
65
24
26
28
27
α3
α2
α1
α4
V34
D26
E41
V37
S28
T27
N24
N
C
D34
Y55
Y56
V42
helix α1
helix α4
helix α2
helix α3
G41
T51
I68
I37
T28
A27
D24
E39
V27
D35
D31
A28
N26
E23
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13. Directed evolution and design of Im protein speciﬁcity. (a) Secondary structure diagram (left) and
the structure of Im9 (right, PDB ID 1EMV) showing positions of altered residues resulting from IVC
experiments aimed at evolving the speciﬁcity of Im9 for the ColE7 DNase and as observed in the mutant
nevIm7 (black circles, yellow balls and sticks). See text for details. (b) Superposition of the ColE7 DNase-
bound structures of WT Im7 (grey, PDB ID 7CEI) and nevIm7 (purple, PDB ID 3gkl) highlighting the
positions aﬀecting Col binding that emerged from directed evolution experiments and the restructuring of
the nevIm7 a1–a2 loop. When bound to their cognate DNases Im9 and Im7 are related by a 19o rigid body
rotation, with the nevIm7 binding conﬁguration intermediate between these two extremes. Speciﬁcity
residues spanning the a1–a2 loop and helix a2 (green) and the hotspot residues (Tyr55 and Tyr56, cyan) in
helix a3 of Im7 are highlighted. Alterations in residues that occur during the ﬁrst ﬁve rounds of selection in
the a1–a2 loop and helix a2 (Asp24, Ala27, Thr28 and Asp34) are shown in yellow. Ile37 (orange) and
Gly41 (cyan) emerged after 8 and 12 rounds of selection, respectively. Also shown in the ﬁgure are the three
positions, Thr51 (T51Q) and Ile68 (I68W) in helices a3 and a4 (magenta), respectively, and Asp35 (D35Y)
in helix a2, where computational design of Im7 led to altered Col E7 DNase speciﬁcity.
92
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 37 ---
redesigned based on a computational second-site suppressor strategy (using the molecular
modelling program ROSETTA), where rotamers of amino acid side chains were modelled on the
ﬁxed polypeptide taken from the crystal structure of the ColE7 DNase–Im7 complex such that
the eﬀect of a destabilizing mutation on one protein was compensated by the alteration of
interacting residues on its counterpart (Kortemme et al. 2004). Redesign of the interface was
accomplished through polarity and steric switches both in combination and in isolation. The
DNase inhibition properties of the designed variants was estimated in vivo in E. coli cells and
also through an in vitro endonuclease assay while the binding between them (cognate and non-
cognate) was estimated via SPR and ﬂuorescence measurements (Kortemme et al. 2004). The
structural accuracy of the prediction method was validated subsequently by the crystal structure
of the redesigned steric switch (RMSD 062 and 05 A˚ for the interface residues and the Ca
backbone, respectively). In all cases, the speciﬁcity of the designed proteins towards their
homologous designed counterpart (cognate binding) was increased relative to the WT or the
other designed counterparts (non-cognate binding). However, the designed cognate complexes
were signiﬁcantly weaker than the WT ColE7 DNase–Im7 complex and the aﬃnity diﬀerences
between the designed cognate and non-cognate complexes are much lower than the cor-
responding diﬀerences between the WT complexes. These discrepancies were attributed to the
role of interactions mediated by interfacial water molecules, which play an essential role in both
stabilizing these complexes and moulding speciﬁcity and were not modelled by the applied
energy function (Kortemme et al. 2004; Kuhlmann et al. 2000; Meenan et al. 2010).
In a follow-up study by Joachimiak et al. binding energies were calculated for the cognate
ColE7 DNase–Im7 complex taking account of all rigid-body conformations around the 19x
pivot centring on Tyr54–Tyr55 (or Tyr55–Tyr56) in Im7 and Im9, respectively (Joachimiak et al.
2006). The design in this case involved the introduction of key mutations predicted to increase
the binding aﬃnity both with and without a second-site suppressor approach. After structural
determination of the complexes of the corresponding ColE7 DNase and Im7 variants their
binding was estimated via SPR and ﬂuorescence measurements and optimized again for speci-
ﬁcity (Joachimiak et al. 2006). A complex of the two proteins bearing seven mutations (K528Q,
T539Q, N516T and K525R in ColE7 and D35Y, T51Q and I68W in Im7) was designed
(Fig. 13b). The corresponding crystal structure revealed one site where a speciﬁcally designed
hydrogen bond network (included in the applied energy function) coincided with the native
hydrogen bond network between Gln528, Gln539 of the ColE7 DNase and Tyr35 and Gln51 of
Im7. A second site comprised direct interactions between Thr516 and Gln517 of the ColE7
DNase with Trp68 of Im7 while Arg525 replaced the salt bridge made by the WT lysine. The
designed protein pair resulted in a 300-fold higher binding selectivity for the cognate versus the
non-cognate complexes and an aﬃnity of 55r10x12 M, which is two orders of magnitude
weaker than the binding aﬃnities of cognate Col DNase–Im protein complexes (Li et al. 2004).
As in the case of the directed evolution experiments, the ColE7 DNase–Im7 computational
redesign did not boost speciﬁcity dramatically over non-cognate complexes. However, the design
demonstrated how interfacial residues and interface hydration leads to the modulation of
speciﬁcity and aﬃnity between the Col DNase IPE and Im proteins (Joachimiak et al. 2006).
10. Im protein folding mechanism and its link to function
The presumption that proteins attain their 3D-fold via a two-state process involving only the
unfolded (U) and native (N) states is almost certainly an oversimpliﬁcation even for small
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
93


--- Page 38 ---
proteins (Jackson, 1998). A simple two-state folding process would require no transitional in-
termediates existing en route to the N state and that folding take place cooperatively with all the
productive collisions leading to native interactions occurring simultaneously (Baldwin et al. 2010).
Regarding the U state as a large ensemble of featureless interchangeable conformers with small
energy barriers between them (Tanford, 1970), the adoption of the correct set of favourable
interactions (among the numerous ones the U state can adopt) would more likely lead to a series
of intermediate states of varying stability thus breaking down the folding pathway into more than
two states. A major challenge in understanding the process of protein folding involves the
delineation of such a folding energy landscape. The Radford laboratory has pioneered the use of
Col DNase-speciﬁc Im proteins to explore the energetics and structure of folding intermediates
that lie on the energy landscape and to link this to Im protein function.
Im proteins have many features making them a useful system with which to characterize the
structure, topology and stability of intermediate (I) state and TS in the folding process. Both Im9
and Im7, which have been the subject of most studies, are small single-domain proteins (86 and
94 amino acids, respectively) that adopt similar helical bundle folds (Dennis et al. 1998). Their
small size, lack of disulﬁdes and prosthetic groups and their all a-helical content along with the
signiﬁcant and various spectroscopic signatures make the two Im proteins ideal for studies of the
energy landscape of folding.
10.1 The folding energy landscape of Im7
In stopped-ﬂow kinetic and equilibrium studies of unfolding and refolding in the presence of
denaturant, monitored by tryptophan ﬂuorescence emission and detected both in the presence
and absence of Na2SO4, it was demonstrated that Im7 folds through a stable intermediate (I) thus
following a distinct three-state pathway with two TSs, TS1 and TS2 (Fig. 14) (Ferguson et al.
Fig. 14. Folding energy landscape of Im7 showing the on-pathway intermediate, I, and the two rate-
determining TSs, TS1 and TS2, involved in the unfolded ensemble of Im7 (U) attaining its native structure
(N). Figure adopted from Pugh et al. (2010) with permission from Elsevier. The ensembles shown are
the result of MD simulations while the structure for Im7 is that of the native Im protein (PDB ID 7CEI).
The regions forming the four helices in the native state are coloured: red (a1), green (a2), purple (a3) and
yellow (a4).
94
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 39 ---
1999). The Im7 I-state was fully formed during the burst phase of folding (within the 25 ms
dead time of the stopped-ﬂow apparatus). In combination with continuous ﬂow data (dead time
y120 ms), it was demonstrated that the Im7 I-intermediate represents an ensemble of pro-
ductive states in equilibrium with both the U and N states and hence on-pathway (Capaldi et al.
2001), and can be formed both in the folding and unfolding pathways irrespective of the con-
centration of Na2SO4 (Cobos & Radford, 2006).
The Im7 I-state consists of helices a1, a2 and a4 being folded natively but largely in the
absence of tertiary interactions, demonstrated through the characterization of Im7 single-point
variants of hydrophobic residues (Capaldi et al. 2002). An NMR analysis of urea-unfolded Im7
pointed to the presence of four clusters of interacting residues each corresponding to a helix of
Im7 (Le Duﬀet al. 2006). In addition to the native fold of the three helices in the Im7 I-state a
speciﬁc hydrophobic core-template for the binding of helix a3 is also present, pointing to a
speciﬁc structure for the intermediate (Capaldi et al. 2002). A signiﬁcant amount of non-native
interactions between helices a1–a2 and a1–a4 are present in the Im7 I-state that serve to
protect hydrophobic residues in these helices from solvent exposure, which would otherwise
occur if the three helices folded natively in the absence of helix a3. The native and non-native
interactions involving a1, a2 and a4 helices, along with signiﬁcant hydrogen bonding that
stabilizes them, were also revealed through hydrogen–deuterium exchange experiments com-
bined with W-value analyses (Gorski et al. 2004) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
(Gsponer et al. 2006). The on-pathway Im7 I-state has been trapped through disruption of N-
state stabilizing interactions between helix a3 and the rest of the protein (Spence et al. 2004).
NMR studies of the trapped Im7 I-state variants revealed that helices a1 and a4 are native while
helix a2 is partially folded and helix a3 is unfolded. Additional interactions between helix a3
residues and other regions of the Im7 I-state were demonstrated as the core switches confor-
mation through TS2 in order for helix a3 to fold (Whittaker et al. 2007).
The non-native interactions evident in the I-state of Im7 are perturbed in TS2 (Fig. 14), with a
number of residues involved participating in the recognition of helix a3 while others become
solvent exposed in the native state. The binding of helix a3 takes place only after TS2 and only in
the presence of the three-helix bundle core, which was predicted computationally (Capaldi et al.
2002) and conﬁrmed through MD simulations (Paci et al. 2004). Helix a3 is the last to fold in the
folding pathway of Im7; its docking to an already preformed three-helix bundle core disrupts
non-native interactions involving the helix (e.g. Tyr55) thereby destabilizing the Im7 I-state and
stabilizing the native state (Knowling et al. 2009).
Folding in Im7 is rate-limited by the proper alignment of helices a1, a2 and a4 in the Im7 I-
state, which form the binding site for helix a3. The conserved residues Tyr55 and Tyr56 in helix
a3 and the variable residues Asn26, Asp31, Leu34, Asp35 and Val42 in helix a2 (Fig. 12b)
participate in non-native interactions in all stages of the folding pathway, modulating the en-
ergetics of the Im7 I-state and the formation of the two TSs (Friel et al. 2009). Sutto et al. showed
that three clusters of frustrated interactions in Im7 involving residues in the a1–a2 loop, helix
a3 and the C-terminal region of helix a4 are responsible for the formation of the Im7 I-state
(Sutto et al. 2007). Importantly, these Im7 residues are key to the binding of the ColE7 DNase
through the dual recognition mechanism (Section 9) and formation of the complex relieves the
frustration they experience (Sutto et al. 2007). The results highlight how the functional con-
straints for speciﬁc inhibition of the ColE7 DNase can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on protein
folding energetics as manifested in this instance by the stabilization of an intermediate Im7
folding state by non-native, frustrated interactions (Friel et al. 2009).
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
95


--- Page 40 ---
The evolutionary balance between Im7 fold and function has been explored directly by Foit
et al. (2009). Using Im7 fused to the b-galactosidase gene, an elegant assay was developed to
screen for in vivo stability of Im7 mutants based solely on antibiotic resistance. Mutations in the
a1–a2 loop (N26 K, V27D and D31G), helix a2 (D35N) and helix a3 (Y56N) were shown to
be thermodynamically stabilizing for Im7 but that these mutations compromised the aﬃnity of
Im7 for the ColE7 DNase (Fig. 12b). Hence, the function of Im7 as a Col inhibitor wins over its
folding energetics; the stability of native Im7 is not optimal but is suﬃcient for the protein to
remain folded, and to presumably survive proteolysis in vivo, while maximizing its aﬃnity for the
ColE7 DNase (Foit et al. 2009).
10.2 Folding intermediates in other Im proteins
Under physiological conditions the folding of Im9 does not proceed through a detectable
I-state even in the presence of stabilizing salt conditions (Ferguson et al. 1999); however, the
accumulation of an early (sub-ms range) intermediate was suggested at low pH values (Gorski
et al. 2001). An intermediate can also be detected in the folding of Im2 chimeras containing
N-terminal regions of Im9. Kinetic analysis of the folding of these chimeras revealed the eﬀect of
sequence on the ruggedness of the energy landscape, the formation and stability of an inter-
mediate and the width of the observed reaction coordinate of the folding energy landscape
(Ferguson et al. 2001; Friel et al. 2003). A misfolded intermediate could be stabilized in Im9
through substitutions at locations that stabilize the Im7 I-state thus switching the observed two-
state folding of Im9 to a three-state mechanism (Friel et al. 2004). A similar switch, with con-
comitant accumulation of an Im9 I-state, has been achieved by increasing the helical propensity
of the helices comprising the three-helix core and by increasing the hydrophobicity of residues
in helix a2, which lead to the introduction of non-native interactions in the Im protein fold
(Cranz-Mileva et al. 2005).
11. Acknowledgements
We thank Luke Hillary and Nick Housden (York) for critical reading of this review. We ac-
knowledge Nick Housden for providing Fig. 7 and Khedidja Mosbahi and Dan Walker
(Glasgow) for providing Fig. 9. Work on Cols in the C. K. lab would not have been possible
without many fruitful and enjoyable collaborations with other laboratories, principally those of
Richard James (Nottingham), GeoﬀMoore (Norwich), Sheena Radford (Leeds) and Marek
Brzozowski (York). C. K. acknowledges all members of his lab, past and present, for contribu-
tions to his Col research and to The Wellcome Trust and the Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council of the UK for funding.
12. References
ANDERLUH, G., HONG, Q., BOETZEL, R., MACDONALD, C.,
MOORE, G. R., VIRDEN, R. & LAKEY, J. H. (2003).
Concerted folding and binding of a ﬂexible colicin do-
main to its periplasmic receptor TolA. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 278, 21860–21868.
ANDERLUH, G. & LAKEY, J. H. (2008). Disparate proteins
use similar architectures to damage membranes. Trends
in Biochemical Sciences 33, 482–490.
ARNOLD, T., ZETH, K. & LINKE, D. (2009). Structure and
function of colicin S4, a colicin with a duplicated re-
ceptor-binding domain. Journal of Biological Chemistry 284,
6403–6413.
BABOOLAL, T. G., CONROY, M. J., GILL, K., RIDLEY, H.,
VISUDTIPHOLE, V., BULLOUGH, P. A. & LAKEY, J. H.
(2008). Colicin N binds to the periphery of its receptor
96
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 41 ---
and translocator, outer membrane protein F. Structure 16,
371–379.
BALDWIN, R. L., FRIEDEN, C. & ROSE, G. D. (2010). Dry
molten globule intermediates and the mechanism of
protein unfolding. Proteins 78, 2725–2737.
BARNEOUD-ARNOULET, A., BARRETEAU, H., TOUZE, T.,
MENGIN-LECREULX, D., LLOUBES, R. & DUCHE, D.
(2010a). Toxicity of the colicin M catalytic domain
exported to the periplasm is FkpA independent. Journal
of Bacteriology 192, 5212–5219.
BARNEOUD-ARNOULET, A., GAVIOLI, M., LLOUBES, R. &
CASCALES, E. (2010b). Interaction of the colicin K bac-
tericidal toxin with components of its import machinery
in the periplasm of Escherichia coli. Journal of Bacteriology
192, 5934–5942.
BARON,
R.,
WONG,
S. E.,
DE
OLIVEIRA,
C. A.
&
MCCAMMON, J. A. (2008). E9-Im9 colicin DNase-
immunity protein biomolecular association in water: a
multiple-copy and accelerated molecular dynamics
simulation study. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 112,
16802–16814.
BARRETEAU, H., BOUHSS, A., GERARD, F., DUCHE, D.,
BOUSSAID, B., BLANOT, D., LLOUBES, R., MENGIN-
LECREULX, D. & TOUZE, T. (2010). Deciphering the
catalytic domain of colicin M, a peptidoglycan lipid
II-degrading enzyme. Journal of Biological Chemistry 285,
12378–12389.
BENEDETTI, H., FRENETTE, M., BATY, D., KNIBIEHLER, M.,
PATTUS, F. & LAZDUNSKI, C. (1991). Individual domains
of colicins confer speciﬁcity in colicin uptake, in pore-
properties and in immunity requirement. Journal of
Molecular Biology 217, 429–439.
BENEDETTI, H., LLOUBES, R., LAZDUNSKI, C. & LETELLIER,
L. (1992). Colicin A unfolds during its translocation in
Escherichia coli cells and spans the whole cell envelope
when its pore has formed. EMBO Journal 11, 441–447.
BEPPU, T., KAWABATA, K. & ARIMA, K. (1972). Speciﬁc
inhibition of cell division by colicin E2 without degra-
dation of deoxyribonucleic acid in a new colicin sensi-
tivity mutant of Escherichia coli. Journal of Bacteriology 110,
485–493.
BERNATH, K., MAGDASSI, S. & TAWFIK, D. S. (2005).
Directed evolution of protein inhibitors of DNA-
nucleases by in vitro compartmentalization (IVC) and
nano-droplet delivery. Journal of Molecular Biology 345,
1015–1026.
BONSOR, D. A., GRISHKOVSKAYA, I., DODSON, E. J. &
KLEANTHOUS, C. (2007). Molecular mimicry enables
competitive recruitment by a natively disordered pro-
tein. Journal of the American Chemical Society 15, 4800–4807.
BONSOR, D. A., HECHT, O., VANKEMMELBEKE, M., SHARMA,
A., KRACHLER, A. M., HOUSDEN, N. G., LILLY, K. J.,
JAMES, R., MOORE, G. R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2009a).
Allosteric b-propeller signalling in TolB and its manip-
ulation by translocating colicins. EMBO Journal 28,
2846–2857.
BONSOR, D. A., HECHT, O., VANKEMMELBEKE, M., SHARMA,
A., KRACHLER, A. M., HOUSDEN, N. G., LILLY, K. J.,
JAMES, R., MOORE, G. R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2009b).
Allosteric beta-propeller signalling in TolB and its
manipulation by translocating colicins. EMBO Journal
28, 2846–2857.
BOURDINEAUD, J. P., BOULANGER, P., LAZDUNSKI, C. &
LETELLIER, L. (1990a). In vivo properties of colicin A:
channel activity is voltage dependent but translocation
may be voltage independent. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, U. S. A. 87(3), 1037.
BOURDINEAUD, J. P., FIEROBE, H. P., LAZDUNSKI, C. &
PAGES, J. M. (1990b). Involvement of OmpF during
reception and translocation steps of colicin N entry.
Molecular Microbiology 4, 1737–1743.
BOUVERET, E., BENEDETTI, H., RIGAL, A., LORET, E. &
LAZDUNSKI, C. (1999). In vitro characterization of pepti-
doglycan-associated lipoprotein (PAL)-peptidoglycan
and PAL-TolB interactions. Journal of Bacteriology 181,
6306–6311.
BOUVERET, E., RIGAL, A., LAZDUNSKI, C. & BENEDETTI, H.
(1998). Distinct regions of the colicin A translocation
domain are involved in the interaction with TolA and
TolB proteins upon import into Escherichia coli. Molecular
Microbiology 27, 143–157.
BUCHANAN, S. K., LUKACIK, P., GRIZOT, S., GHIRLANDO, R.,
ALI, M. M., BARNARD, T. J., JAKES, K. S., KIENKER, P. K.
& ESSER, L. (2007). Structure of colicin I receptor
bound to the R-domain of colicin Ia: implications for
protein import. EMBO Journal 26, 2594–2604.
CADIEUX, N., PHAN, P. G., CAFISO, D. S. & KADNER, R. J.
(2003). Diﬀerential substrate-induced signaling through
the TonB-dependent transporter BtuB. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, U. S. A. 100, 10688–10693.
CAPALDI, A. P., KLEANTHOUS, C. & RADFORD, S. E. (2002).
Im7 folding mechanism: misfolding on a path to the
native state. Nature Structural Biology 9, 209–216.
CAPALDI,
A. P.,
SHASTRY,
M. C.,
KLEANTHOUS,
C.,
RODER, H. & RADFORD, S. E. (2001). Ultrarapid mixing
experiments reveal that Im7 folds via an on-pathway
intermediate. Nature Structural Biology 8, 68–72.
CARR, S., WALKER, D., JAMES, R., KLEANTHOUS, C. &
HEMMINGS, A. M. (2000). Crystallization of the cytotoxic
domain of a ribosome-inactivating colicin in complex
with its immunity protein. Acta Crystallographica. Section
D, Biological Crystallography 56, 1630–1633.
CASCALES, E., BUCHANAN, S. K., DUCHE, D., KLEANTHOUS,
C., LLOUBES, R., POSTLE, K., RILEY, M., SLATIN, S. &
CAVARD, D. (2007). Colicin biology. Microbiology and
Molecular Biology Review 71, 158–229.
CASCALES, E., GAVIOLI, M., STURGIS, J. N. & LLOUBES, R.
(2000). Proton motive force drives the interaction of the
inner membrane TolA and outer membrane pal proteins
in Escherichia coli. Molecular Microbiology 38, 904–915.
CASCALES, E., LLOUBES, R. & STURGIS, J. N. (2001).
The TolQ-TolR proteins energize TolA and share
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
97


--- Page 42 ---
homologies
with
the
ﬂagellar
motor
proteins
MotA–MotB. Molecular Microbiology 42, 795–807.
CAVARD, D. & LAZDUNSKI, C. (1990). Colicin cleavage by
OmpT protease during both entry into and release from
Escherichia coli cells. Journal of Bacteriology 172, 648–652.
CHAULEAU, M., MORA, L., SERBA, J. & DE ZAMAROCZY, M.
(2011). FtsH-dependent processing of RNase colicins D
and E3 means that only the cytotoxic domains are
imported
into
the
cytoplasm. Journal
of
Biological
Chemistry 286, 29397–29407.
COBOS, E. S. & RADFORD, S. E. (2006). Sulfate-induced
eﬀects in the on-pathway intermediate of the bacterial
immunity protein Im7. Biochemistry 45, 2274–2282.
COLLINS,
E. S.,
WHITTAKER,
S. B.,
TOZAWA,
K.,
MACDONALD, C., BOETZEL, R., PENFOLD, C. N., REILLY,
A., CLAYDEN, N. J., OSBORNE, M. J., HEMMINGS, A. M.,
KLEANTHOUS, C., JAMES, R. & MOORE, G. R. (2002).
Structural dynamics of the membrane translocation
domain of colicin E9 and its interaction with TolB.
Journal of Molecular Biology 318, 787–904.
CRAMER, W. A., ZHANG, Y. L., SCHENDEL, S., MERRILL,
A. R., SONG, H. Y., STAUFFACHER, C. V. & COHEN, F. S.
(1992). Dynamic properties of the colicin E1 ion chan-
nel. FEMS Microbiology and Immunology 5, 71–81.
CRANZ-MILEVA, S., FRIEL, C. T. & RADFORD, S. E. (2005).
Helix stability and hydrophobicity in the folding mech-
anism of the bacterial immunity protein Im9. Protein
Engineering, Design and Selection 18, 41–50.
DAVIES, J. K. & REEVES, P. (1975a). Genetics of resistance
to colicins in Escherichia coli K-12: cross-resistance
among colicins of group A. Journal of Bacteriology 123,
102–117.
DAVIES, J. K. & REEVES, P. (1975b). Genetics of resistance
to colicins in Escherichia coli K-12: cross-resistance
among colicins of group B. Journal of Bacteriology 123,
96–101.
DE ZAMAROCZY, M. &
BUCKINGHAM, R. H.
(2002).
Importation of nuclease colicins into E coli cells:
endoproteolytic cleavage and its prevention by the
immunity protein. Biochimie 84, 423–432.
DE ZAMAROCZY, M., MORA, L., LECUYER, A., GELI, V. &
BUCKINGHAM, R. H. (2001). Cleavage of colicin D is
necessary for cell killing and requires the inner mem-
brane peptidase LepB. Molecular Cell 8, 159–168.
DENNIS, C. A., VIDELER, H., PAUPTIT, R. A., WALLIS, R.,
JAMES, R., MOORE, G. R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (1998). A
structural comparison of the colicin immunity proteins
Im7 and Im9 gives new insights into the molecular de-
terminants of immunity-protein speciﬁcity. Biochemistry
Journal 333, 183–191.
DEPREZ, C., BLANCHARD, L., GUERLESQUIN, F., GAVIOLI, M.,
SIMORRE, J. P., LAZDUNSKI, C., MARION, D. & LLOUBES,
R. (2002). Macromolecular import into Escherichia coli:
the TolA C-terminal domain changes conformation
when interacting with the colicin A toxin. Biochemistry 41,
2589–2598.
DEROUICHE, R., ZEDER-LUTZ, G., BENEDETTI, H., GAVIOLI,
M., RIGAL, A., LAZDUNSKIL, C. & LLOUBES, R. (1997).
Binding of colicins A and E1 to puriﬁed TolA domains.
Microbiology 143, 3185–3192.
DOUDEVA, L. G., HUANG, H., HSIA, K. C., SHI, Z., LI, C. L.,
SHEN, Y., CHENG, Y. S. & YUAN, H. S. (2006). Crystal
structural analysis and metal-dependent stability and
activity studies of the ColE7 endonuclease domain in
complex with DNA/Zn2+ or inhibitor/Ni2+. Protein
Science 15, 269–280.
DUCHE, D., BATY, D., CHARTIER, M. & LETELLIER, L.
(1994). Unfolding of colicin A during its translocation
through the Escherichia coli envelope as demonstrated by
disulﬁde bond engineering. Journal of Biological Chemistry
269, 24820.
DUCHE, D., FRENKIAN, A., PRIMA, V. & LLOUBES, R. (2006).
Release of immunity protein requires functional endo-
nuclease colicin import machinery. Journal of Bacteriology
188, 8593–8600.
DUCHE, D., ISSOUF, M. & LLOUBES, R. (2009). Immunity
protein protects colicin E2 from OmpT protease.
Journal of Biochemistry 145, 95–101.
EL GHACHI, M., BOUHSS, A., BARRETEAU, H., TOUZE, T.,
AUGER, G., BLANOT, D. & MENGIN-LECREULX, D.
(2006). Colicin M exerts its bacteriolytic eﬀect via en-
zymatic degradation of undecaprenyl phosphate-linked
peptidoglycan precursors. Journal of Biological Chemistry
281, 22761–22772.
EL KOUHEN, R., FIEROBE, H. P., SCIANIMANICO, S., STEIERT,
M., PATTUS, F. & PAGES, J. M. (1993). Characterization
of the receptor and translocator domains of colicin N.
European Journal of Biochemistry 214, 635–639.
FERGUSON, N., CAPALDI, A. P., JAMES, R., KLEANTHOUS, C.
& RADFORD, S. E. (1999). Rapid folding with and with-
out populated intermediates in the homologous four-
helix proteins Im7 and Im9. Journal of Molecular Biology
286, 1597–1608.
FERGUSON, N., LI, W., CAPALDI, A. P., KLEANTHOUS, C. &
RADFORD, S. E. (2001). Using chimeric immunity pro-
teins to explore the energy landscape for alpha-helical
protein folding. Journal of Molecular Biology 307, 393–405.
FOIT, L., MORGAN, G. J., KERN, M. J., STEIMER, L. R.,
VON HACHT, A. A., TITCHMARSH, J., WARRINER, S. L.,
RADFORD, S. E. & BARDWELL, J. C. (2009). Optimizing
protein stability in vivo. Molecular Cell 36, 861–871.
FRIEL, C. T., BEDDARD, G. S. & RADFORD, S. E. (2004).
Switching two-state to three-state kinetics in the helical
protein Im9 via the optimisation of stabilising non-
native interactions by design. Journal of Molecular Biology
342, 261–273.
FRIEL, C. T., CAPALDI, A. P. & RADFORD, S. E. (2003).
Structural analysis of the rate-limiting transition states in
the folding of Im7 and Im9: similarities and diﬀerences
in the folding of homologous proteins. Journal of
Molecular Biology 326, 293–305.
98
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 43 ---
FRIEL, C. T., SMITH, D. A., VENDRUSCOLO, M., GSPONER, J.
& RADFORD, S. E. (2009). The mechanism of folding of
Im7 reveals competition between functional and kinetic
evolutionary constraints. Nature Structural and Molecular
Biology 16, 318–324.
GALBURT, E. A. & STODDARD, B. L. (2002). Catalytic me-
chanisms of restriction and homing endonucleases.
Biochemistry 41, 13851–13860.
GARDNER, A., WEST, S. A. & BUCKLING, A. (2004).
Bacteriocins, spite and virulence. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London B 271, 1529–1535.
GERARD, F., BROOKS, M. A., BARRETEAU, H., TOUZE, T.,
GRAILLE, M., BOUHSS, A., BLANOT, D., VAN TILBEURGH,
H. & MENGIN-LECREULX, D. (2010). X-ray structure and
site-directed mutagenesis analysis of the Escherichia coli
colicin M immunity protein. Journal of Bacteriology 193,
205–214.
GERDING, M. A., OGATA, Y., PECORA, N. D., NIKI, H. &
DE BOER, P. A. (2007). The trans-envelope Tol–Pal
complex is part of the cell division machinery and re-
quired for proper outer-membrane invagination during
cell constriction in E. coli. Molecular Microbiology 63,
1008–1025.
GOEMAERE, E. L., CASCALES, E. & LLOUBES, R. (2007).
Mutational analyses deﬁne helix organization and key
residues of a bacterial membrane energy-transducing
complex. Journal of Molecular Biology 366, 1424–1436.
GOKCE, I., RAGGETT, E. M., HONG, Q., VIRDEN, R.,
COOPER,
A. &
LAKEY,
J. H.
(2000).
The
TolA-
recognition site of colicin N. ITC, SPR and stopped-
ﬂow ﬂuorescence deﬁne a crucial 27-residue segment.
Journal of Molecular Biology 304, 621–632.
GORBALENYA, A. E. (1994). Self-splicing group I and group
II introns encode homologous (putative) DNA endo-
nucleases of a new family. Protein Science 3, 1117–1120.
GORSKI,
S. A.,
CAPALDI,
A. P.,
KLEANTHOUS,
C.
&
RADFORD, S. E. (2001). Acidic conditions stabilise
intermediates populated during the folding of Im7 and
Im9. Journal of Molecular Biology 312, 849–863.
GORSKI, S. A., LE DUFF, C. S., CAPALDI, A. P., KALVERDA,
A. P., BEDDARD, G. S., MOORE, G. R. & RADFORD, S. E.
(2004). Equilibrium hydrogen exchange reveals exten-
sive hydrogen bonded secondary structure in the on-
pathway intermediate of Im7. Journal of Molecular Biology
337, 183–193.
GRAILLE,
M.,
MORA,
L.,
BUCKINGHAM,
R. H.,
VAN
TILBEURGH, H. & DE ZAMAROCZY, M. (2004). Structural
inhibition of the colicin D tRNase by the tRNA-
mimicking
immunity
protein.
EMBO
Journal
23,
1474–1482.
GSPONER, J., HOPEARUOHO, H., WHITTAKER, S. B., SPENCE,
G. R., MOORE, G. R., PACI, E., RADFORD, S. E. &
VENDRUSCOLO, M. (2006). Determination of an en-
semble of structures representing the intermediate state
of the bacterial immunity protein Im7. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, U. S. A. 103, 99–104.
HALE, G. (2006). Therapeutic antibodies – delivering the
promise?
Advanced
Drug
Delivery
Review
58(5–6),
633–639.
HANDS, S. L., HOLLAND, L. E., VANKEMMELBEKE, M.,
FRASER, L., MACDONALD, C. J., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R.
& PENFOLD, C. N. (2005). Interactions of TolB with the
translocation domain of colicin E9 require an extended
TolB box. Journal of Bacteriology 187, 6733–6741.
HECHT, O., RIDLEY, H., BOETZEL, R., LEWIN, A., CULL, N.,
CHALTON, D. A., LAKEY, J. H. & MOORE, G. R. (2008).
Self-recognition by an intrinsically disordered protein.
FEBS Letters 582, 2673–2677.
HECHT, O., RIDLEY, H., LAKEY, J. H. & MOORE, G. R.
(2009a). A common interaction for the entry of colicin
N and ﬁlamentous phage into Escherichia coli. Journal of
Molecular Biology 388, 880–893.
HECHT, O., RIDLEY, H., LAKEY, J. H. & MOORE, G. R.
(2009b). A common interaction for the entry of colicin
N and ﬁlamentous phage into Escherichia coli. Journal of
Molecular Biology 388, 880–893.
HECHT, O., ZHANG, Y., LI, C., PENFOLD, C. N., JAMES, R. &
MOORE, G. R. (2010). Characterisation of the interac-
tion of colicin A with its co-receptor TolA. FEBS Letters
584, 2249–2252.
HERSCHMAN, H. R. & HELINSKI, D. R. (1967). Puriﬁcation
and characterization of colicin E2 and colicin E3. Journal
of Biological Chemistry 242, 5360–5368.
HILSENBECK, J. L., PARK, H., CHEN, G., YOUN, B., POSTLE,
K. & KANG, C. (2004). Crystal structure of the cytotoxic
bacterial protein colicin B at 25 A resolution. Molecular
Microbiology 51, 711–720.
HOUSDEN, N. G. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2011). Thermo-
dynamic dissection of colicin interactions. Methods in
Enzymology 488, 123–145.
HOUSDEN, N. G., LOFTUS, S. R., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R. &
KLEANTHOUS, C. (2005). Cell entry mechanism of en-
zymatic bacterial colicins: porin recruitment and the
thermodynamics of receptor binding. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, U. S. A. 102, 13849–13854.
HOUSDEN,
N. G.,
WOJDYLA,
J. A.,
KORCZYNSKA,
J.,
GRISHKOVSKAYA, I., KIRKPATRICK, N., BRZOZOWSKI,
A. M. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2010). Directed epitope de-
livery across the Escherichia coli outer membrane through
the porin OmpF. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, U.S.A 107, 21412–21417.
HSIA, K. C., CHAK, K. F., LIANG, P. H., CHENG, Y. S., KU,
W. Y. & YUAN, H. S. (2004). DNA binding and de-
gradation by the HNH protein ColE7. Structure 12,
205–214.
HULLMANN, J., PATZER, S. I., ROMER, C., HANTKE, K. &
BRAUN, V. (2008). Periplasmic chaperone FkpA is es-
sential for imported colicin M toxicity. Molecular
Microbiology 69, 926–937.
IACOVACHE, I., VAN DER GOOT, F. G. & PERNOT, L. (2008).
Pore formation: an ancient yet complex form of attack.
Biochimica Biophysica Acta 1778(7–8), 1611–1623.
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
99


--- Page 44 ---
ITO, K. & AKIYAMA, Y. (2005). Cellular functions, mech-
anism of action, and regulation of FtsH protease.
Annual Review of Microbiology 59, 211–231.
JACKSON, S. E. (1998). How do small single-domain pro-
teins fold? Fold Design 3, R81–91.
JAKES, K. S., DAVIS, N. G. & ZINDER, N. D. (1988).
A hybrid toxin from bacteriophage f1 attachment pro-
tein and colicin E3 has altered cell receptor speciﬁcity.
Journal of Bacteriology 170, 4231–4238.
JAKES, K. S. & FINKELSTEIN, A. (2010). The colicin Ia
receptor, Cir, is also the translocator for colicin Ia.
Molecular Microbiology 75, 567–578.
JOACHIMIAK, L. A., KORTEMME, T., STODDARD, B. L. &
BAKER, D. (2006). Computational design of a new hy-
drogen bond network and at least a 300-fold speciﬁcity
switch at a protein–protein interface. Journal of Molecular
Biology 361, 195–208.
JOHNSON, A. E. & VAN WAES, M. A. (1999). The translo-
con: a dynamic gateway at the ER membrane. Annual
Review of Cell Development Biology 15, 799–842.
JOURNET, L., BOUVERET, E., RIGAL, A., LLOUBES, R.,
LAZDUNSKI, C. & BENEDETTI, H. (2001). Import of co-
licins across the outer membrane of Escherichia coli
involves multiple protein interactions in the periplasm.
Molecular Microbiology 42, 331–344.
KEEBLE, A. H., JOACHIMIAK, L. A., MATE, M. J., MEENAN,
N., KIRKPATRICK, N., BAKER, D. & KLEANTHOUS, C.
(2008). Experimental and computational analyses of the
energetic basis for dual recognition of immunity pro-
teins by colicin endonucleases. Journal of Molecular Biology
379, 745–759.
KEEBLE,
A. H.,
KIRKPATRICK,
N.,
SHIMIZU,
S.
&
KLEANTHOUS, C. (2006). Calorimetric dissection of co-
licin DNase–immunity protein complex speciﬁcity.
Biochemistry 45, 3243–3254.
KEEBLE, A. H. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2005). The kinetic basis
for dual recognition in colicin endonuclease-immunity
protein complexes. Journal of Molecular Biology 352,
656–671.
KEEBLE, A. H., MATE´, M. J. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2005).
HNH endonucleases. In Homing Endonucleases and Inteins,
vol. 16 (eds. M. Belfort, V. Derbyshire, B. Stoddard &
D. Wood), pp. 49–65. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
KEENAN, R. J., FREYMANN, D. M., STROUD, R. M. &
WALTER, P. (2001). The signal recognition particle.
Annual Review of Biochemistry 70, 755–775.
KHERSONSKY, O., ROODVELDT, C. & TAWFIK, D. S. (2006).
Enzyme promiscuity: evolutionary and mechanistic
aspects. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 10, 498–508.
KIELY, P. D. & JOHNSON, D. M. (2002). Inﬂiximab and
leﬂunomide combination therapy in rheumatoid ar-
thritis: an open-label study. Rheumatology (Oxford) 41,
631–637.
KIRKUP, B. C. & RILEY, M. A. (2004). Antibiotic-mediated
antagonism leads to a bacterial game of rock-paper-
scissors in vivo. Nature 428, 412.
KLEANTHOUS, C. (2010). Swimming against the tide: prog-
ress and challenges in our understanding of colicin
translocation. Nature Reviews Microbiology 8, 843–848.
KLEANTHOUS,
C.,
KUHLMANN,
U. C.,
POMMER,
A. J.,
FERGUSON, N., RADFORD, S. E., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R.
& HEMMINGS, A. M. (1999). Structural and mechanistic
basis of immunity toward endonuclease colicins. Nature
Structural Biology 6, 243–252.
KLEANTHOUS, C. & WALKER, D. (2001). Immunity pro-
teins: enzyme inhibitors that avoid the active site. Trends
in Biochemical Sciences 26, 624–631.
KNOWLING, S. E., FIGUEIREDO, A. M., WHITTAKER, S. B.,
MOORE, G. R. & RADFORD, S. E. (2009). Amino acid
insertion reveals a necessary three-helical intermediate
in the folding pathway of the colicin E7 immunity pro-
tein Im7. Journal of Molecular Biology 392, 1074–1086.
KO, T. P., LIAO, C. C., KU, W. Y., CHAK, K. F. & YUAN,
H. S. (1999). The crystal structure of the DNase domain
of colicin E7 in complex with its inhibitor Im7 protein.
Structure 7, 91–102.
KORTEMME,
T.,
JOACHIMIAK,
L. A.,
BULLOCK,
A. N.,
SCHULER, A. D., STODDARD, B. L. & BAKER, D. (2004).
Computational redesign of protein–protein interaction
speciﬁcity. Nature Structural and Molecular Biology 11,
371–379.
KRACHLER, A. M., SHARMA, A., CAULDWELL, A., PAPADAKOS,
G. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2010). TolA modulates the
oligomeric status of YbgF in the bacterial periplasm.
Journal of Molecular Biology 403, 270–285.
KUHLMANN, U. C., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R., KLEANTHOUS,
C. & HEMMINGS, A. M. (1999). Structural parsimony in
endonuclease active sites: should the number of homing
endonuclease families be redeﬁned? FEBS Letters 463, 1.
KUHLMANN, U. C., POMMER, A. J., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R.
& KLEANTHOUS, C. (2000). Speciﬁcity in protein–protein
interactions: the structural basis for dual recognition in
endonuclease
colicin-immunity
protein
complexes.
Journal of Molecular Biology 301, 1163.
KURISU, G., ZAKHAROV, S. D., ZHALNINA, M. V., BANO, S.,
EROUKOVA, V. Y., ROKITSKAYA, T. I., ANTONENKO,
Y. N., WIENER, M. C. & CRAMER, W. A. (2003). The
structure of BtuB with bound colicin E3 R-domain im-
plies a translocon. Nature Structural Biology 10, 948–954.
LANCASTER, L. E., SAVELSBERGH, A., KLEANTHOUS, C.,
WINTERMEYER, W. & RODNINA, M. V. (2008). Colicin E3
cleavage of 16S rRNA impairs decoding and accelerates
tRNA
translocation
on
Escherichia
coli ribosomes.
Molecular Microbiology 69, 390–401.
LAZZARONI, J. C., DUBUISSON, J. F. & VIANNEY, A. (2002).
The Tol proteins of Escherichia coli and their involvement
in the translocation of group A colicins. Biochimie 84,
391–397.
LE DUFF, C. S., WHITTAKER, S. B., RADFORD, S. E. &
MOORE, G. R. (2006). Characterisation of the confor-
mational properties of urea-unfolded Im7: implications
100
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 45 ---
for the early stages of protein folding. Journal of Molecular
Biology 364, 824–835.
LEVIN, K. B., DYM, O., ALBECK, S., MAGDASSI, S., KEEBLE,
A. H., KLEANTHOUS, C. & TAWFIK, D. S. (2009).
Following evolutionary paths to protein–protein inter-
actions with high aﬃnity and selectivity. Nature Structural
and Molecular Biology 16, 1049–1055.
LI, W., HAMILL, S. J., HEMMINGS, A. M., MOORE, G. R.,
JAMES, R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (1998). Dual recognition
and the role of speciﬁcity-determining residues in coli-
cin
E9
DNase-immunity
protein
interactions.
Biochemistry 37, 11771–11779.
LI, W., KEEBLE, A. H., GIFFARD, C., JAMES, R., MOORE,
G. R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2004). Highly discriminating
protein–protein interaction speciﬁcities in the context
of a conserved binding energy hotspot. Journal of
Molecular Biology 337, 743–759.
LIN, Y. L., ELIAS, Y. & HUANG, R. H. (2005). Structural
and mutational studies of the catalytic domain of colicin
E5: a tRNA-speciﬁc ribonuclease. Biochemistry 44,
10494–10500.
LOFTUS, S. R., WALKER, D., MATE, M. J., BONSOR, D. A.,
JAMES, R., MOORE, G. R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2006).
Competitive recruitment of the periplasmic translo-
cation portal TolB by a natively disordered domain of
colicin E9. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
U. S. A. 103, 12353–12358.
LUBKOWSKI,
J.,
HENNECKE,
F.,
PLUCKTHUN,
A.
&
WLODAWER, A. (1999). Filamentous phage infection:
crystal structure of g3p in complex with its coreceptor,
the C-terminal domain of TolA. Structure 7, 711–722.
LUNA-CHAVEZ, C., LIN, Y. L. & HUANG, R. H. (2006).
Molecular basis of inhibition of the ribonuclease activity
in colicin E5 by its cognate immunity protein. Journal of
Molecular Biology 358, 571–579.
MATE, M. J. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2004). Structure-based
analysis of the metal-dependent mechanism of H-N-H
endonucleases.
Journal
of
Biological
Chemistry
279,
34763–34769.
MEENAN,
N. A.,
SHARMA,
A.,
FLEISHMAN,
S. J.,
MACDONALD, C. J., MOREL, B., BOETZEL, R., MOORE,
G. R., BAKER, D. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2010). The struc-
tural and energetic basis for high selectivity in a high-
aﬃnity protein–protein interaction. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, U. S. A. 107, 10080–10085.
MENG, G., SURANA, N. K., ST GEME, III, J. W. &
WAKSMAN, G. (2006). Structure of the outer membrane
translocator domain of the Haemophilus inﬂuenzae Hia
trimeric autotransporter. EMBO Journal 25, 2297–2304.
MONTALVAO,
R. W.,
CAVALLI,
A.,
SALVATELLA,
X.,
BLUNDELL, T. L. & VENDRUSCOLO, M. (2008). Structure
determination of protein–protein complexes using
NMR
chemical
shifts:
case
of
an
endonuclease
colicin-immunity protein complex. Journal of the American
Chemical Society 130, 15990–15996.
MOSBAHI, K., LEMAITRE, C., KEEBLE, A. H., MOBASHERI, H.,
MOREL, B., JAMES, R., MOORE, G. R., LEA, E. J. &
KLEANTHOUS, C. (2002). The cytotoxic domain of coli-
cin E9 is a channel-forming endonuclease. Nature
Structural Biology 9, 476–484.
MOSBAHI, K., WALKER, D., JAMES, R., MOORE, G. R. &
KLEANTHOUS, C. (2006). Global structural rearrange-
ment of the cell penetrating ribonuclease colicin E3 on
interaction with phospholipid membranes. Protein Science
15, 620–627.
MOSBAHI, K., WALKER, D., LEA, E., MOORE, G. R., JAMES,
R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2004). Destabilization of the
colicin E9 Endonuclease domain by interaction with
negatively charged phospholipids: implications for co-
licin translocation into bacteria. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 279, 22145–22151.
NG, C. L., LANG, K., MEENAN, N. A., SHARMA, A., KELLEY,
A. C., KLEANTHOUS, C. & RAMAKRISHNAN, V. (2010a).
Structural basis for 16S ribosomal RNA cleavage by the
cytotoxic domain of colicin E3. Nature Structural and
Molecular Biology 17, 1241–1246.
NG, C. L., LANG, K., MEENAN, N. A., SHARMA, A., KELLEY,
A. C., KLEANTHOUS, C. & RAMAKRISHNAN, V. (2010b).
Structural basis for 16S ribosomal RNA cleavage by the
cytotoxic domain of colicin E3. Nature Structural and
Molecular Biology 17, 1241–1246.
NOSE, K. & MIZUNO, D. (1968). Degradation of ribosomes
in Escherichia coli cells treated with colicin E2. Journal of
Biochemistry 64, 1–6.
OGAWA, T., INOUE, S., YAJIMA, S., HIDAKA, M. & MASAKI,
H. (2006). Sequence-speciﬁc recognition of colicin E5,
a tRNA-targeting ribonuclease. Nucleic Acids Research 34,
6065–6073.
OGAWA, T., TOMITA, K., UEDA, T., WATANABE, K., UOZUMI,
T. & MASAKI, H. (1999). A cytotoxic ribonuclease
targeting speciﬁc transfer RNA anticodons. Science 283,
2097–2100.
OLDHAM, R. K. & DILLMAN, R. O. (2008). Monoclonal
antibodies in cancer therapy: 25 years of progress.
Journal of Clinical Oncology 26, 1774–1777.
PACI, E., FRIEL, C. T., LINDORFF-LARSEN, K., RADFORD,
S. E., KARPLUS, M. & VENDRUSCOLO, M. (2004). Com-
parison of the transition state ensembles for folding
of Im7 and Im9 determined using all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations with phi value restraints. Proteins
54, 513–525.
PARSONS, L. M., LIN, F. & ORBAN, J. (2006). Peptidoglycan
recognition by Pal, an outer membrane lipoprotein.
Biochemistry 45, 2122–2128.
PENFOLD, C. N., HEALY, B., HOUSDEN, N. G., BOETZEL, R.,
VANKEMMELBEKE, M., MOORE, G. R., KLEANTHOUS, C. &
JAMES, R. (2004a). Flexibility in the receptor-binding
domain of the enzymatic colicin E9 is required for
toxicity against Escherichia coli cells. Journal of Bacteriology
186, 4520–4527.
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
101


--- Page 46 ---
PENFOLD, C. N., HEALY, B., HOUSDEN, N. G., BOETZEL, R.,
VANKEMMELBEKE, M., MOORE, G. R., KLEANTHOUS, C. &
JAMES, R. (2004b). Flexibility in the receptor-binding
domain of the enzymatic colicin E9 is required for
toxicity against Escherichia coli cells. Journal of Bacteriology
186, 4520–4527.
PILSL, H. & BRAUN, V. (1998). The Ton system can func-
tionally replace the TolB protein in the uptake of mu-
tated colicin U. FEMS Microbiology Letters 164, 363–367.
PILSL, H., SMAJS, D. & BRAUN, V. (1999). Characterization
of colicin S4 and its receptor, OmpW, a minor protein
of the Escherichia coli outer membrane. Journal of Bacterio-
logy 181, 3578–3581.
POHLSCHRODER, M., PRINZ, W. A., HARTMANN, E. &
BECKWITH, J. (1997). Protein translocation in the three
domains of life: variations on a theme. Cell 91, 563–566.
POKALA, N. & HANDEL, T. M. (2001). Review: protein
design – where we were, where we are, where we’re
going. Journal of Structural Biology 134, 269–281.
POMMER, A. J., CAL, S., KEEBLE, A. H., WALKER, D., EVANS,
S. J., KUHLMANN, U. C., COOPER, A., CONNOLLY, B. A.,
HEMMINGS,
A. M.,
MOORE,
G. R.,
JAMES,
R.
&
KLEANTHOUS, C. (2001). Mechanism and cleavage
speciﬁcity of the H-N-H endonuclease colicin E9.
Journal of Molecular Biology 314, 735.
POSTLE, K. & KADNER, R. J. (2003). Touch and go: tying
TonB to transport. Molecular Microbiology 49, 869–882.
PUGH, S. D., GELL, C., SMITH, D. A., RADFORD, S. E. &
BROCKWELL, D. J. (2010). Single-molecule studies of the
Im7 folding landscape. Journal of Molecular Biology 398,
132–145.
RAGGETT, E. M., BAINBRIDGE, G., EVANS, L. J., COOPER, A.
& LAKEY, J. H. (1998). Discovery of critical Tol
A-binding residues in the bactericidal toxin colicin N:
a
biophysical
approach.
Molecular
Microbiology
28,
1335–1343.
RIDLEY, H., JOHNSON, C. L. & LAKEY, J. H. (2010).
Interfacial interactions of pore-forming colicins. Ad-
vances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 677, 81–90.
RILEY, M. A. (1998). Molecular mechanisms of bacteriocin
evolution. Annual Review of Genetics 32, 255–278.
ROODVELDT, C., AHARONI, A. & TAWFIK, D. S. (2005).
Directed evolution of proteins for heterologous ex-
pression and stability. Current Opinion in Structural Biology
15, 50–56.
SENIOR, B. W. & HOLLAND, I. B. (1971). Eﬀect of colicin
E3 upon the 30S ribosomal subunit of Escherichia coli.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciencs, U. S. A. 68(5),
959–963.
SHARMA, O., DATSENKO, K. A., ESS, S. C., ZHALNINA,
M. V., WANNER, B. L. & CRAMER, W. A. (2009).
Genome-wide screens: novel mechanisms in colicin im-
port and cytotoxicity. Molecular Microbiology 73, 571–585.
SHARMA, O., YAMASHITA, E., ZHALNINA, M. V., ZAKHAROV,
S. D., DATSENKO, K. A., WANNER, B. L. & CRAMER,
W. A. (2007). Structure of the complex of the colicin E2
R-domain and its BtuB receptor. The outer membrane
colicin translocon. Journal of Biological Chemistry 282,
23163–23170.
SHI, Z., CHAK, K. F. & YUAN, H. S. (2005). Identiﬁcation
of an essential cleavage site in ColE7 required for im-
port and killing of cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry 280,
24663–24668.
SHUB, D. A., GOODRICH-BLAIR, H. & EDDY, S. R. (1994).
Amino acid sequence motif of group I intron endo-
nucleases is conserved in open reading frames of group
II introns. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 19, 402–404.
SMALLWOOD, C. R., MARCO, A. G., XIAO, Q., TRINH, V.,
NEWTON, S. M. & KLEBBA, P. E. (2009). Fluorescein-
ation of FepA during colicin B killing: eﬀects of tem-
perature, toxin and TonB. Molecular Microbiology 72,
1171–1180.
SOELAIMAN, S., JAKES, K., WU, N., LI, C. & SHOHAM, M.
(2001). Crystal structure of colicin E3: implications for
cell entry and ribosome inactivation. Molecular Cell 8,
1053–1062.
SPECTOR, J., ZAKHAROV, S., LILL, Y., SHARMA, O., CRAMER,
W. A. & RITCHIE, K. (2010). Mobility of BtuB and
OmpF in the Escherichia coli outer membrane: implica-
tions for dynamic formation of a translocon complex.
Biophysical Journal 99, 3880–3886.
SPENCE, G. R., CAPALDI, A. P. & RADFORD, S. E. (2004).
Trapping the on-pathway folding intermediate of Im7 at
equilibrium. Journal of Molecular Biology 341, 215–226.
SUTTO, L., LATZER, J., HEGLER, J. A., FERREIRO, D. U. &
WOLYNES, P. G. (2007). Consequences of localized
frustration for the folding mechanism of the IM7 pro-
tein. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U. S. A.
104, 19825–19830.
TANFORD, C. (1970). Protein denaturation. C. Theoretical
models for the mechanism of denaturation. Advanced
Protein Chemistry 24, 1–95.
TOKURIKI, N. & TAWFIK, D. S. (2009). Protein dynamism
and evolvability. Science 324, 203–207.
TOMITA, K., OGAWA, T., UOZUMI, T., WATANABE, K. &
MASAKI, H. (2000). A cytotoxic ribonuclease which
speciﬁcally cleaves four isoaccepting arginine tRNAs at
their anticodon loops. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, U. S. A. 97, 8278–8283.
VAN DEN BREMER, E. T., KEEBLE, A. H., JISKOOT, W.,
SPELBRINK, R. E., MAIER, C. S., VAN HOEK, A., VISSER,
A. J., JAMES, R., MOORE, G. R., KLEANTHOUS, C. &
HECK, A. J. (2004). Distinct conformational stability and
functional activity of four highly homologous en-
donuclease colicins. Protein Science 13, 1391–1401.
VANKEMMELBEKE,
M.,
HEALY,
B.,
MOORE,
G. R.,
KLEANTHOUS, C., PENFOLD, C. N. & JAMES, R. (2005).
Rapid detection of colicin E9-induced DNA damage
using Escherichia coli cells carrying SOS promoter–lux
fusions. Journal of Bacteriology 187, 4900–4907.
VANKEMMELBEKE,
M.,
ZHANG,
Y.,
MOORE,
G. R.,
KLEANTHOUS, C., PENFOLD, C. N. & JAMES, R. (2009).
102
G. Papadakos et al.


--- Page 47 ---
Energy-dependent immunity protein release during
tol-dependent nuclease colicin translocation. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 284, 18932–18941.
VETTER, I. R., PARKER, M. W., TUCKER, A. D., LAKEY, J. H.,
PATTUS, F. & TSERNOGLOU, D. (1998). Crystal structure
of a colicin N fragment suggests a model for toxicity.
Structure 6, 863–874.
WALKER, D., LANCASTER, L., JAMES, R. & KLEANTHOUS, C.
(2004a). Identiﬁcation of the catalytic motif of the
microbial ribosome inactivating cytotoxin colicin E3.
Protein Science 13, 1603–1611.
WALKER, D., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R. & KLEANTHOUS, C.
(2003). Thermodynamic consequences of bipartite im-
munity protein binding to the ribosomal ribonuclease
colicin E3. Biochemistry 42, 4161.
WALKER, D., MOSBAHI, K., VANKEMMELBEKE, M., JAMES, R.
& KLEANTHOUS, C. (2007). The role of electrostatics in
colicin nuclease domain translocation into bacterial
cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry 282, 31389–31397.
WALKER, D., ROLFE, M., THOMPSON, A., MOORE, G. R.,
JAMES, R., HINTON, J. C. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (2004b).
Transcriptional proﬁling of colicin-induced cell death of
Escherichia coli MG1655 identiﬁes potential mechanisms
by which bacteriocins promote bacterial diversity.
Journal of Bacteriology 186, 866.
WALLIS, R., LEUNG, K. Y., OSBORNE, M. J., JAMES, R.,
MOORE, G. R. & KLEANTHOUS, C. (1998). Speciﬁcity in
protein–protein recognition: conserved Im9 residues
are the major determinants of stability in the colicin E9
DNase–Im9 complex. Biochemistry 37, 476.
WALLIS, R., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R. & KLEANTHOUS, C.
(1995). Protein–protein interactions in colicin E9
DNase-immunity protein complexes. 1. Diﬀusion-
controlled association and femtomolar binding for the
cognate complex. Biochemistry 34, 13743–13750.
WALLIS, R., REILLY, A., BARNES, K., ABELL, C., CAMPBELL,
D. G., MOORE, G. R., JAMES, R. & KLEANTHOUS, C.
(1994). Tandem overproduction and characterisation of
the nuclease domain of colicin E9 and its cognate
inhibitor protein Im9. European Journal of Biochemistry
220, 447.
WEBSTER, R. E. (1991). The tol gene products and the
import of macromolecules into Escherichia coli. Molecular
Microbiology 5, 1005–1011.
WHITTAKER, S. B., SPENCE, G. R., GUNTER GROSSMANN, J.,
RADFORD, S. E. & MOORE, G. R. (2007). NMR analysis
of the conformational properties of the trapped on-
pathway folding intermediate of the bacterial immunity
protein Im7. Journal of Molecular Biology 366, 1001–1015.
WIENER, M., FREYMANN, D., GHOSH, P. & STROUD, R. M.
(1997). Crystal structure of colicin Ia. Nature 385,
461–464.
WIENER, M. C. (2005). TonB-dependent outer membrane
transport: going for Baroque? Current Opinion in Struc-
tural Biology 15, 394–400.
YAMASHITA, E., ZHALNINA,
M. V.,
ZAKHAROV,
S. D.,
SHARMA, O. & CRAMER, W. A. (2008). Crystal structures
of the OmpF porin: function in a colicin translocon.
EMBO Journal 27, 2171–2180.
ZAKHAROV, S. D. & CRAMER, W. A. (2004). On the mech-
anism and pathway of colicin import across the E. Coli
outer membrane. Frontiers in Bioscience 9, 1311–1317.
ZAKHAROV, S. D., EROUKOVA, V. Y., ROKITSKAYA, T. I.,
ZHALNINA, M. V., SHARMA, O., LOLL, P. J., ZGURSKAYA,
H. I., ANTONENKO, Y. N. & CRAMER, W. A. (2004a).
Colicin occlusion of OmpF and TolC channels: outer
membrane translocons for colicin import. Biophysical
Journal 87, 3901–3911.
ZAKHAROV, S. D., KOTOVA, E. A., ANTONENKO, Y. N. &
CRAMER, W. A. (2004b). On the role of lipid in colicin
pore formation. Biochimica Biophysica Acta 1666, 239–249.
ZAKHAROV, S. D., SHARMA, O., ZHALNINA, M. V. &
CRAMER, W. A. (2008). Primary events in the colicin
translocon: FRET analysis of colicin unfolding initiated
by binding to BtuB and OmpF. Biochemistry 47, 12802–
12809.
ZAKHAROV, S. D., ZHALNINA, M. V., SHARMA, O. &
CRAMER, W. A. (2006). The colicin E3 outer membrane
translocon: immunity protein release allows interaction
of the cytotoxic domain with OmpF porin. Biochemistry
45, 10199–10207.
ZETH, K., ROMER, C., PATZER, S. I. & BRAUN, V. (2008).
Crystal structure of colicin M, a novel phosphatase
speciﬁcally imported by Escherichia coli. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 283, 25324–25331.
ZHANG, X. Y., GOEMAERE, E. L., SEDDIKI, N., CELIA, H.,
GAVIOLI, M., CASCALES, E. & LLOUBES, R. (2011).
Mapping the interactions between Escherichia coli TolQ
transmembrane segments. Journal of Biological Chemistry
286, 11756–11764.
ZHANG, X. Y., GOEMAERE, E. L., THOME, R., GAVIOLI, M.,
CASCALES, E. & LLOUBES, R. (2009a). Mapping the
interactions between Escherichia coli tol subunits: ro-
tation of the TolR transmembrane helix. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 284, 4275–4282.
ZHANG, Y., VANKEMMELBEKE, M., BAARDELANG, P., PAOLI,
M., PENFOLD, C. N. & JAMES, R. (2009b). The crystal
structure of the TolB box of Colicin A in complex with
TolB reveals important diﬀerences in the recruitment of
the common TolB translocation portal used by group A
colicins. Molecular Microbiology 75, 623–636.
ZHANG, Y., VANKEMMELBEKE, M. N., HOLLAND, L. E.,
WALKER, D. C., JAMES, R. & PENFOLD, C. N. (2008).
Investigating early events in receptor binding and trans-
location of colicin E9 using synchronized cell killing
and proteolytic cleavage. Journal of Bacteriology 190,
4342–4350.
ZHANG, Y. L. & CRAMER, W. A. (1992). Constraints im-
posed by protease accessibility on the trans-membrane
and surface topography of the colicin E1 ion channel.
Protein Science 1, 1666–1676.
Nuclease colicins and their immunity proteins
103
