--- Page 1 ---
Optogenetic Control of Microbial Consortia Populations for
Chemical Production
Makoto A. Lalwani, Hinako Kawabe, Rebecca L. Mays, Shannon M. Hoﬀman, and José L. Avalos*
Cite This: https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Microbial co-culture fermentations can improve
chemical production from complex biosynthetic pathways over
monocultures by distributing enzymes across multiple strains,
thereby reducing metabolic burden, overcoming endogenous
regulatory mechanisms, or exploiting natural traits of diﬀerent
microbial species. However, stabilizing and optimizing microbial
subpopulations for maximal chemical production remains a major
obstacle in the ﬁeld. In this study, we demonstrate that
optogenetics is an eﬀective strategy to dynamically control
populations in microbial co-cultures. Using a new optogenetic
circuit we call OptoTA, we regulate an endogenous toxin-antitoxin
system, enabling tunability of Escherichia coli growth using only
blue light. With this system we can control the population
composition of co-cultures of E. coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. When introducing in each strain diﬀerent metabolic modules of
biosynthetic pathways for isobutyl acetate or naringenin, we found that the productivity of co-cultures increases by adjusting the
population ratios with speciﬁc light duty cycles. This study shows the feasibility of using optogenetics to control microbial consortia
populations and the advantages of using light to control their chemical production.
KEYWORDS: optogenetics, co-culture fermentations, metabolic engineering, microbial consortia, dynamic control
M
etabolic engineering aims to rewire the metabolism of
microorganisms to convert simple feedstocks into
products of interest.1 Dynamic control,2 pathway compartmen-
talization,3 and adaptive laboratory evolution4 have helped to
further improve microbial chemical production in engineered
strains. However, overburdening an organism with genetic
modiﬁcations can lead to growth defects and loss of
productivity.5 Additionally, maximizing metabolic ﬂux through
a pathway of interest often requires bypassing endogenous
regulatory mechanisms,6 functionally expressing heterologous
proteins (including enzymes and transporters),7 or avoiding
intermediate loss to competing pathways by deleting
endogenous genes.8 When such interventions to enhance a
particular step of a pathway undermine others, necessary
compromises may lead to pathway ineﬃciencies. For example,
when an enzyme important for one step of the pathway also
competes in another step to make a byproduct, it may not help
to overexpress or delete the enzyme.9 Another frequent
challenge is the ability to functionally express some
heterologous enzymes in organisms that otherwise have
important advantages to produce a speciﬁc chemical. For
example, the diﬃculty of expressing some eukaryotic enzymes
in E. coli undermines the extraordinary ability of this organism
to produce many precursors.10 These often-encountered
challenges limit strain titers, yields, and productivities.
A solution that has been proposed to overcome these
challenges is to separate and distribute metabolic roles among
diﬀerent members of a microbial consortium.11 Natural
microbial consortia have been used, in some cases for
millennia, to produce a wide variety of products, notably in
the food and bulk chemical industries.12 Metabolic engineers
have thus spent signiﬁcant eﬀort in engineering synthetic
microbial consortia for chemical production. Co-culturing
strains or organisms with specialized roles can improve
productivity by reducing the total resources or genetic
modiﬁcations required of each member. Furthermore,
biosynthetic pathways can be split into submodules and be
optimized based on the unique advantages of diﬀerent species
while avoiding endogenous regulation and competing path-
ways. Engineered microbial consortia have been applied to
divide and optimize biosynthetic pathways within separate
strains or species, leading to more eﬃcient production of
compounds such as muconic acid (by overcoming secretion of
Received:
April 24, 2021
Research Article
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
© XXXX American Chemical Society
A
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
Downloaded via KUNMING UNIV OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on August 11, 2021 at 01:33:25 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


--- Page 2 ---
an intermediate), resveratrol (by avoiding downregulation of
an intermediate pathway step), and rosmarinic acid (by
suboptimization of pathway modules).13−15 They have also
been utilized in consolidated bioprocessing approaches to
more eﬃciently break down complex feedstocks, such as
lignocellulosic biomass, into biofuels such as ethanol, butanol,
and isobutanol,16−18 while avoiding the increases in production
time, process complexity, and sterilization costs introduced by
two-stage bioprocesses.19 Such studies demonstrate the
beneﬁts of combining the strengths of specialized strains or
species to perform complex tasks.
Despite this progress made in engineering microbial
consortia, maintaining population stability has remained an
obstacle to their more widespread use and application in
commercial processes. There is a natural propensity for the
fastest growing member of a co-culture to eventually
outcompete the others and establish a monoculture. The
most common approach to address this problem is to adjust
the initial inoculation sizes of each member to ensure they are
all maintained throughout the fermentation.18,20 However,
variations at inoculation (such as deviations in preculture age
or measurement errors), ampliﬁed throughout fermentation,
can lead to batch-to-batch inconsistencies. Furthermore, this
strategy does not provide the opportunity to adjust microbial
populations once the fermentation is initialized, which could
help oﬀset these variations. Clever solutions have been found
to ensure all members of engineered co-cultures are
maintained during fermentations by engineered neutrality or
symbiosis: for example, by making strains reliant on diﬀerent
carbon or nutrient sources,13 modifying them to be co-
dependent so that one species cannot grow without the
other(s),21 or using quorum sensing to regulate growth via
interpopulation communication.22 While these strategies have
been largely successful at stabilizing members of engineered
consortia, they still require careful tuning of parameters such as
inoculation size and media components, which cannot be
easily altered mid-fermentation. Furthermore, the population
distributions established by these strategies are determined by
the properties of each system and cannot be dynamically
controlled to ﬁnd, achieve, and maintain varying optimal
population ratios to maximize chemical production.
We propose that optogenetic control of microbial growth
oﬀers a promising solution for optimizing co-culture
fermentations. Light provides a tunable and reversible method
of regulating gene expression, and has previously been applied
to dynamically control and optimize monoculture fermenta-
tions,23−26 including in lab-scale bioreactors at high cell
densities. It has also been used to modulate growth rates of
species such as Escherichia coli27 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae28
by controlling expression of essential metabolic valves such as
amino acid biosynthesis or glycolysis. Unlike initial inoculation
size and ratio, light can be easily turned on and oﬀat any time
and in any duty cycle, allowing for real-time adjustments to
perturbations during a fermentation. Additionally, optogenetic
growth valves can be designed to be independent of process
conditions or other consortium members, such that each
Figure 1. OptoTA enables blue light-dependent bacterial growth. (a) OptoTA uses the pDusk and pDawn systems to control growth of E. coli
using the mazEF toxin-antitoxin system. Growth is suppressed in the dark (left panel) via pDusk expression of mazF leading to mRNA degradation.
Growth is enabled in blue light (right panel) through pDawn expression of mazE, which inhibits MazF, and ceased expression of mazF. E. coli cells
and protein shapes were created using Biorender.com. (b) Growth of E. coli strain containing OptoTA (EMAL144) in M9 medium with glucose,
glycerol, or xylose, or LB in blue light or darkness, compared to a control strain lacking OptoTA (EMAL221) grown in M9 medium with glucose.
(c) Growth time course of EMAL144 in M9 medium with glucose under diﬀerent light conditions: full light (square), 10 s ON/90 s OFF (circle),
1 s ON/99 s OFF (triangle), and full darkness (diamond), compared to EMAL221 (Control, X) grown in ambient light. All data are shown as
mean values; error bars represent the s.d. of n = 3 biologically independent samples.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
B


--- Page 3 ---
organism is controlled orthogonally without speciﬁc restric-
tions from nutrients, carbon sources, or symbiotic relationships
(natural or engineered). Such advantages of optogenetics could
make it possible to establish optimal populations in co-culture
fermentations for chemical production, irrespective of
ﬂuctuations in inoculations and intermicrobial interactions.
An eﬀective way to dynamically regulate microbial growth is
using gene circuits that selectively repress essential functions or
activate toxins. Strategies to control proliferation of engineered
strains, often in the context of biocontainment, have included
“kill switches” that activate toxic genes29 and “safeguards” that
render strains dependent on expression of essential genes.30,31
Of these options, the MazEF toxin-antitoxin (TA) system
seemed especially amenable to optogenetic control. The
MazEF system consists of a stable toxin, MazF, an
endoribonuclease that degrades mRNA, and an unstable
antitoxin, MazE,32 which binds to MazF homodimers to
inhibit them.33 Under conditions of cellular stress, the unstable
MazE is degraded by the ClpP protease,32 leading to mRNA
cleavage by MazF and either programmed cell death32 or
reversible growth inhibition.34 As an endoribonuclease, MazF
toxicity is decoupled from any speciﬁc metabolic pathway and
more self-contained than nutrient-dependent strategies such as
auxotrophy. Furthermore, it can be neutralized through
expression of mazE, enabling titratability of its toxicity.
Previous studies have shown inhibition and recovery of growth
in E. coli using chemical induction of mazF and mazE,35,36
respectively, so we reasoned that we could similarly implement
optogenetic control of these genes for eﬀective light regulation
of E. coli growth.
In this study, we apply optogenetics to control the
population dynamics of co-cultures of the model organisms
E. coli and S. cerevisiae for chemical production. We develop
optogenetic circuits to manipulate bacterial growth rate by
regulating expression of the MazEF TA system using blue light,
eliminating the need to engineer symbiosis or carbon source
specialization between the species. We then harness the ability
of E. coli to produce simple precursor molecules (such as
amino acids37,38) at high yields and titers, which are then
assimilated by S. cerevisiae to synthesize downstream products
while avoiding endogenous upstream regulatory mechanisms
and competition for intermediate metabolites. Using a division
of labor approach to feed E. coli-derived intermediates into
S. cerevisiae for conversion into ﬁnal products, we produce
isobutyl acetate and naringenin in light-controlled co-culture
fermentations and show that speciﬁc light schedules can be
Figure 2. Characterization of bacteria−yeast growth in consortium. (a) Growth measurements of E. coli strain containing OptoTA (EMAL144) in
YNB + M9 salts (YNB-C), YNB + K3 salts, SC + M9 salts, or SC + K3 salts media under full light or darkness. (b) Final single cell ratios of wild-
type E. coli/S. cerevisiae grown for 24-h in co-cultures initiated with diﬀerent inoculation sizes (shown as OD600 values in table under the graph) in
YNB-C medium. Cells were counted with ﬂow cytometry using E. coli (EMAL221) and yeast (yMAL272) strains containing mCherry and BFP,
respectively. (c) Final single cell E. coli/S. cerevisiae ratios of E. coli containing OptoTA (EMAL144) and wild-type yeast (yMAL272) grown for 24-
h in co-cultures initiated from diﬀerent inoculation sizes (shown as OD600 values in table under the graph) in YNB-C medium and exposed to full
light, 10 s ON/90 s OFF, or full darkness. Cells were counted with ﬂow cytometry using mCherry and BFP to label EMAL144 and yMAL272,
respectively. All data are shown as mean values; error bars represent the s.d. of n = 3 biologically independent samples.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
C


--- Page 4 ---
used to establish subpopulations with increased production.
Our ﬁndings demonstrate the potential of using optogenetics
as a new method for controlling microbial consortia
populations and optimizing the productivity of co-culture
fermentations for chemical production.
■RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Development of a Light-Dependent Growth Control
Circuit for Escherichia coli. To establish optogenetic control
over E. coli, we applied the pDusk and pDawn systems39 to
control the MazEF TA system using darkness and blue light.
Brieﬂy, pDusk uses the synthetic two-component YF1-FixJ
system to activate gene expression in darkness, while pDawn
reverses the signal of pDusk using the cI repressor to activate
expression in blue light (SI Note). Using these systems, we
developed a new optogenetic circuit, which we call OptoTA, to
control bacterial growth with light. OptoTA expresses mazF
using pDusk (PFixK2) and mazE using pDawn (PR), such that
MazE-mediated inhibition of MazF enables growth in blue
light, while repression of mazE and expression of mazF
prevents growth in darkness (Figure 1a). When grown in M9
media containing glucose as a carbon source, a ΔmazEF strain
containing OptoTA shows 19-fold higher growth under full
blue light compared to darkness, while reaching 77% of the cell
density of a control strain that is not light-dependent (Figure
1b), suggesting that MazE-mediated repression of MazF is
either incomplete or that MazEF production carries some
burden. The diﬀerence between light and dark (27-fold) is
even higher in xylose. Additionally, growth in darkness is lower
(OD600 < 0.25 after 24 h at 30 °C) under diﬀerent carbon
sources such as glycerol and xylose than in glucose, but higher
(OD600 = 0.57 after 12 h) in the richer lysogeny broth (LB),
consistent with previous observations that MazF-mediated
toxicity is media-dependent.35 These results show that
OptoTA can regulate E. coli growth in several types of media
commonly used for biotechnological applications.
To determine whether light dosage can be used to tune
growth rate using OptoTA, we performed growth curve
experiments under diﬀerent light duty cycles, chosen based on
the rapid time scales of YF1 phosphorylation of FixJ (<30 s)40
and activation times of pDusk and pDawn (<10 min).39
Intermediate duty cycles (10 s or 1 s of light per 100 s) result
in intermediate growth proﬁles between full light and darkness,
showing that growth rate is titratable by varying light exposure
(Figure 1c). A 10% light dose (10 s ON/90 s OFF) of light
recovers 72% of the growth rate observed in full light (0.17 vs
0.23 h−1), though less light exposure results in a ∼1-h increase
in lag phase. This strain containing OptoTA, however, shows a
20% decrease in growth rate under full light compared to a
wild-type control (0.23 vs 0.29 h−1). Nevertheless, the ability of
OptoTA to tune bacterial growth provides the capability
needed to dynamically control populations in co-cultures with
other species.
Optogenetic Control of a Consortium of E. coli and
S. cerevisiae. The optogenetic regulation of E. coli growth
attainable with OptoTA is suﬃcient to control populations in
co-cultures with other organisms with lower growth rates that
would otherwise be outcompeted in media favorable to E. coli
(which is the case for common culturing conditions),41,42 such
as the model yeast S. cerevisiae. However, S. cerevisiae does not
grow on M9 medium (commonly used in E. coli cultures),
while E. coli does not grow on synthetic complete (SC)
medium (commonly used in S. cerevisiae cultures) (Supple-
mentary Figure S1a). To ﬁnd a deﬁned minimal medium that
would support both E. coli and S. cerevisiae cultivation, while
still favoring E. coli, we tested combinations of commonly used
bacterial buﬀersM9 and K343with two commonly used
yeast media−yeast nitrogen base (YNB) and SC. A strain of
E. coli containing OptoTA shows diﬀerences in growth
between blue light and darkness in each of these hybrid
media, though growth in darkness is signiﬁcantly increased in
buﬀered SC media (OD600 > 2 after 14 h at 30 °C), suggesting
that the toxicity of MazF is attenuated by supplementation of
nutrients such as amino acids, probably due to reduced
degradation of MazE by Lon protease, which occurs under
conditions of nutrient starvation (Figure 2a).34,35 YNB media
supplemented with glucose and M9 buﬀer shows the best
optogenetic control over E. coli growth (5-fold diﬀerence in
OD600) while still supporting yeast growth, albeit with a longer
lag phase (Supplementary Figure S1b). We therefore
continued our experiments using this media formulation,
which we named YNB-Consortia (YNB-C).
To characterize the growth dynamics of E. coli and
S. cerevisiae in a consortium, we sought to examine how light
control can create divergent population ratios from the same
initial inoculation. To do so, we inoculated co-cultures to
diﬀerent initial cell densities for each species in YNB-C
medium and grew them under blue light or darkness. Because
OD600 cannot be used to distinguish population sizes in co-
cultures due to the diﬀering optical properties of each species,
we quantiﬁed cell counts using ﬂow cytometry with counting
beads, distinguishing bacterial and yeast populations by light
scattering properties and expression of distinct ﬂuorophores
mCherry for E. coli and BFP for S. cerevisiae (Supplementary
Figure S2; see Methods). When using a strain of E. coli that is
not light-regulated, the population ratios after 12 h of co-
culture at 30 °C greatly favor E. coli in most inoculation ratios
(Figure 2b). A ﬁnal bacteria-to-yeast ratio <1 is only achieved
when inoculating a very small amount of E. coli (OD600 = 1 ×
10−5, or ∼1 × 104 cells/mL) and a much larger amount of
S. cerevisiae (OD600 = 1, or ∼1 × 107 cells/mL), reﬂecting the
need to give yeast a considerable advantage in initial
inoculation to compensate for its slower growth in YNB-C
medium (Figure 2b). Such large disparities in inoculation size
could reduce the eﬃciency of co-culture fermentations, in
which the relative abundances of biosynthetic submodules
must be carefully balanced to maximize productivity. In
contrast, when controlling E. coli growth with light using
OptoTA, it becomes possible to reach bacteria-to-yeast ratios
of <1 even at much lower yeast (OD600 = 0.1) or higher
bacterial (OD600 = 1 × 10−3) inoculations (Figure 2c). Such
inoculations are more balanced and more closely represent
ratios previously used in E. coli−S. cerevisiae co-cultures (cell
ratios ∼1:100−100:1).14,44 Our goal was not necessarily to
achieve speciﬁc target population ratios, but instead to
demonstrate that it is possible to obtain several ﬁnal
population ratios from the same initial inoculation, or to
reach similar ratios from diﬀerent initial inoculations, simply by
changing light duty cycle. Thus, the light control enabled by
OptoTA provides an additional degree of freedom that
augments adjustment of inoculation sizes to control microbial
populations in co-culture fermentations.
Production of Isobutyl Acetate Using an E. coli−
S. cerevisiae Consortium. Precise control over microbial co-
cultures holds promise for applications in metabolic engineer-
ing, in which biosynthetic pathways can be divided into
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
D


--- Page 5 ---
separate modules among diﬀerent species to make products of
interest. To test this, we devised a division of labor strategy to
produce isobutyl acetate, a chemical solvent, fragrance, and
potential biofuel that is derived from isobutanol and acetyl-
CoA.45 We divided the biosynthetic pathway for isobutyl
acetate into two modules: an E. coli module that produces
isobutanol, followed by an S. cerevisiae module that combines
isobutanol with acetyl-CoA to produce isobutyl acetate (Figure
3a). Isobutanol and acetyl-CoA are both derived from pyruvate
in opposing pathways, so there is an inherent competition in
the biosynthesis of these two precursors that could be resolved
using two specialized strains in co-culture (Supplementary
Figure S3a). We engineered a light-controlled isobutanol-
producing strain of E. coli by transforming a ΔmazEF strain
with plasmids containing OptoTA and the isobutanol
biosynthetic pathway.26 This strain (EMAL274) secretes up
Figure 3. Isobutyl acetate production using bacteria−yeast co-cultures. (a) Isobutyl acetate biosynthetic pathway split into two modules. Module 1
(E. coli) produces isobutanol from glucose and is comprised of alsS from Bacillus subtilis, ilvC, ilvD, kivd from Lactococcus lactis, and adhA from L.
lactis. Module 2 (S. cerevisiae) converts isobutanol and acetyl-CoA into isobutyl acetate and is comprised of ATF1 and feedback-insensitive mutant
acs* from S. enterica (L641P). The acetate to make acetyl-CoA is derived from pyruvate produced from glycolysis, which is decarboxylated by
Pdc1p and then oxidized by Ald6p (Supplementary Figure S3a). E. coli and S. cerevisiae cells were created using Biorender.com. (b) Isobutanol
production from monocultures of E. coli strain containing Module 1 (EMAL274), grown in M9 medium + 2% glucose under full light, then induced
with IPTG at diﬀerent cell densities and fermented under 10 s ON/90 s OFF light for 48 h. UI denotes cultures not induced with IPTG. (c)
Isobutyl acetate production from monocultures of a yeast strain containing Module 2 (yMAL362), grown in SC medium + 2% glucose, then
resuspended in fresh media + 4% glucose + 1 g/L of isobutanol at diﬀerent cell densities and fermented for 48 h. Control cultures (Ctrl) were not
resuspended in media containing isobutanol. (d) Isobutyl acetate production from co-cultures of an E. coli strain containing OptoTA and Module 1
(EMAL274) and a yeast strain containing Module 2 (yMAL362), starting from diﬀerent inoculation sizes (shown in table below graph) and grown
for 48-h under diﬀerent light conditions: full light, 10 s ON/90 s OFF, 1 s ON/99 s OFF, and full darkness. Production from co-cultures using a
light-insensitive strain of E. coli (EMAL203), instead of EMAL274, grown in the dark is shown as control. (e,f) Relative populations of bacteria and
yeast after 24 and 48 h of co-culture fermentations, shown as serial dilutions on agar plates compatible for bacterial growth: (e) EMAL274 on M9 +
kanamycin + carbenicillin plates, or yeast growth: (f) yMAL362 on SC plates. Each plate contains serial dilutions from co-cultures grown in
diﬀerent light conditions 100% = continuous blue light; 10% = 10 s ON/90 s OFF; 1% = 1 s ON/99 s OFF; D = darkness; B = E. coli only control;
Y = S. cerevisiae only control. Statistics are derived using a two-sided t-test (**P < 0.01); ns = not signiﬁcant. All data are shown as mean values;
error bars represent the s.d. of n = 4 biologically independent samples.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
E


--- Page 6 ---
to 3.9 ± 0.3 g/L isobutanol into the culture supernatant when
grown in M9 media, with production peaking when IPTG
induction occurs at intermediate cell densities (0.2 ≤ρ ≤0.9,
where ρ represents the cell density at induction, measured as
OD600) (Figure 3b). We next engineered a strain of S. cerevisiae
with increased acetyl-CoA production that could assimilate
isobutanol from the culture supernatant and convert it into
isobutyl acetate. To achieve this, we integrated multiple copies
of a feedback-insensitive acetyl-CoA synthetase46 from
Salmonella enterica (acs L641P) and the yeast alcohol
acetyltransferase (ATF1) into the δ-sites of CEN.PK2−1C.
The resulting strain (yMAL362) produces up to 90 ± 10 mg/L
isobutyl acetate when grown to various cell densities and then
resuspended in SC media containing 1 g/L isobutanol, with
production saturating around ρ ≥6.6 (Figure 3c; see
Methods). These results show that our bacterial strain can
produce and export isobutanol while our yeast strain can
import it and convert it to isobutyl acetate, oﬀering the
potential for each module to be optimized independently to
balance demand for the acetyl-CoA precursor while completing
a complex production pathway.
Figure 4. Naringenin production using a bacteria−yeast consortium. (a) Naringenin biosynthetic pathway split into two modules. Module 1
(E. coli) produces tyrosine from glucose and is comprised of tktA, ppsA, aroGD146N, aroB, aroD, aroE, aroL, aroA, aroC, tyrAM53I, A354V, and tyrB.
Module 2 (S. cerevisiae) converts tyrosine into naringenin and is comprised of FjTAL, At4CL2, HaCHS, PhCHI, and ACC1S650A, S1157A. * denotes
feedback-insensitive mutant enzymes. E. coli and S. cerevisiae cells were created using Biorender.com. (b) Tyrosine production from monocultures
of an E. coli strain containing Module 1 (EMAL374) grown in M9 medium + 2% glucose under full light, then induced with IPTG at diﬀerent cell
densities and fermented under 10 s ON/90 s OFF light for 48 h. UI denotes cultures not induced with IPTG. (c) Naringenin production from
monocultures of a yeast strain containing Module 2 (yMAL485) grown in SC medium + 2% glucose, then resuspended in fresh SC + 4% glucose +
1 g/L of tyrosine at diﬀerent cell densities and fermented for 48 h. Control cultures (Ctrl) were not resuspended in media containing tyrosine. (d)
Naringenin production from co-cultures of an E. coli strain containing OptoTA and Module 1 (EMAL374) and a yeast strain containing Module 2
(yMAL485), starting from diﬀerent inoculation sizes (shown in table below graph) and grown for 48-h under diﬀerent light conditions: full light,
10 s ON/90 s OFF, 1 s ON/99 s OFF, and full darkness. Production from co-cultures using a light-insensitive strain of E. coli (EMAL60), instead of
EMAL374, grown in the dark is shown as control. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001. Statistics are derived using a two-sided t-test. All data are shown as
mean values; error bars represent the s.d. of n = 4 biologically independent samples.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
F


--- Page 7 ---
To determine if optogenetics can be used to improve
chemical production from microbial consortia, we combined
our bacterial and yeast modules to produce isobutyl acetate in
light-controlled fermentations. We grew co-cultures of
EMAL274 and yMAL362 at 30 °C for 48 h under various
light conditions and initial inoculum sizes, using 1 mM IPTG
to induce isobutanol production at the time of co-inoculation.
We found that isobutyl acetate production depends greatly not
only on the inoculation but also on the light duty cycles
applied to the co-cultures (Figure 3d). The highest titer of
isobutyl acetate (330 ± 10 mg/L) is obtained using
intermediate inoculation sizes of bacteria (OD600 = 0.5) and
yeast (OD600 = 2), as well as a 1% duty cycle of light (1 s ON/
100 s). This isobutyl acetate production is 6.9-fold or 12.3-fold
higher than if the co-culture is inoculated with less yeast
(OD600 = 0.2, 48 ± 3 mg/L) or more yeast (OD600 = 10, 27 ±
6 mg/L), respectively (while keeping the inoculation size of
bacteria constant), emphasizing the inﬂuence of initial
inoculation on fermentation productivity. However, within
the most productive inoculation, light control of the consortia
population during the fermentation can signiﬁcantly improve
production by 71% (from 190 ± 30 mg/L) relative to
conditions that would favor bacterial growth (under con-
tinuous light), and 3.6-fold higher (from 90 ± 60 mg/L)
relative to conditions that would favor yeast growth (under
darkness). These results demonstrate the beneﬁt of adjusting
microbial populations from productive inoculums during co-
culture fermentation, which we achieve with light control of
bacterial cell growth using OptoTA.
Light duty cycles in optogenetically controlled co-cultures
can also inﬂuence the levels of intermediates relayed between
strains, shedding light on the system’s dynamics. Production of
the intermediate, isobutanol, increases with higher light
exposure at lower bacterial inoculations, but is maximized by
intermediate light exposures at higher inoculations (Supple-
mentary Figure S3b). These results suggest that intermediate
light doses help tune bacterial growth to maximize production
of isobutanol without outcompeting yeast, thereby leading to
improved isobutyl acetate production. This is supported by the
observation that under the most productive conditions we
found, isobutyl acetate production is 83% higher using a light-
regulated bacterial strain relative to using a light-insensitive
strain (180 ± 40 mg/L), even though isobutanol production is
comparable (Figure 3d; Supplementary Figure S3b). The levels
of isobutanol ultimately reﬂect the bacterial population and
reveal that yeast-catalyzed esteriﬁcation is limiting, probably
because of limited acetyl-CoA supply,47 which would need to
be further improved to increase conversion to isobutyl acetate.
Serial dilution analysis of consortia populations shows that
bacterial growth is still light-controlled under fermentation
conditions, while yeast growth is slightly more eﬃcient under
lower light dosage, likely due to less competition from E. coli
(Figure 3e,f). There is no apparent contribution from
phototoxicity, as yeast growth is the same under both full
light and darkness (Supplementary Figure S4). Bacteria-only
controls solely produce isobutanol, while yeast-only controls
produce neither isobutanol nor isobutyl acetate, conﬁrming
that isobutyl acetate is produced only by combining the two
strains in co-cultures (Supplementary Figure S3c). Our
ﬁndings establish optogenetics as an eﬀective strategy to
dynamically regulate bacteria−yeast populations during co-
culture fermentations to optimize chemical production.
Production of Naringenin Using an E. coli−S. cerevi-
siae Consortium. To demonstrate that light-based control of
microbial consortia can be extended to other metabolic
pathways, we developed a co-culture production strategy for
naringenin, a natural product with potential therapeutic
properties.48 This long metabolic pathway, which starting
from increasing aromatic amino acid biosynthesis comprises 16
diﬀerent enzymes, can load a single strain with excessive
metabolic burden. Thus, taking advantage of E. coli’s sound
ability to produce aromatic amino acids,38 and aiming to
bypass the strong endogenous regulation of aromatic amino
acid biosynthesis in yeast,6 we split the naringenin production
pathway into an E. coli module that produces and exports
tyrosine followed by an S. cerevisiae module that intakes
tyrosine and combines it with malonyl-CoA to produce
naringenin (Figure 4a). To engineer a light-responsive E. coli
strain to produce tyrosine, we transformed a ΔmazEF strain
with plasmids encoding for OptoTA and enzymes to enhance
tyrosine biosynthesis.49 This strain (EMAL374) exports up to
1.4 ± 0.1 g/L tyrosine into the supernatant when grown in M9
media, with production peaking when inducing with IPTG at
relatively high cell densities (ρ ≥1.9) (Figure 4b). Next, to
produce a S. cerevisiae strain that produces naringenin from
imported tyrosine, we integrated the naringenin biosynthetic
pathway,50,51 as well as feedback-insensitive acetyl-CoA
carboxylase,52 into CEN.PK2−1C (see Methods). Naringenin
production from this strain (yMAL485) in SC media shows no
dependence on the cell density at which tyrosine is fed,
reaching 12−14 mg/L from 1 g/L tyrosine (Figure 4c). These
results suggest that, as with isobutanol and isobutyl acetate, the
tyrosine and naringenin modules can be combined to complete
a complex biosynthetic pathway while avoiding endogenous
regulatory mechanisms.
We next tested whether co-cultures of our tyrosine and
naringenin modules can be controlled with light to improve
naringenin production. Fermentations initiated from inocu-
lums of various sizes and proportions and conducted under
diﬀerent light conditions revealed that, as with isobutyl acetate,
naringenin production depends on both variables. The highest
naringenin titers (12.6 ± 0.5 mg/L) are obtained at
intermediate levels of light exposure, this time using a 10%
(10 s ON/100 s) duty cycle and the largest inoculum sizes
tested (Figure 4d). This titer is not only 84% higher than what
a light-insensitive control strain of E. coli produces (6.8 ± 0.2
mg/L), but it is also 64% higher than what is obtained with the
light-sensitive strain under full light (7.7 ± 0.3 mg/L) and 50%
higher than what is produced by the same strain under
darkness (8.4 ± 0.4 mg/L). This suggests that the populations
of E. coli and yeast obtained in co-cultures of the light-sensitive
strain exposed to intermediate levels of light are more favorable
for naringenin production, and that these populations can be
achieved by the optogenetic regulation aﬀorded by OptoTA.
The similar or lower levels of production of the negative
controls (conducted in the dark with a light-insensitive strain)
compared to the full light controls indicate that diﬀerences in
naringenin titers under various light duty cycles reﬂect real
improvements in production due to optogenetic growth
control, and are not due to naringenin photobleaching in full
light conditions, although light sensitivity of the product could
be inﬂuencing our ﬁnal titers.53 Production is still inﬂuenced
by initial inoculums, with the most productive yielding 46%
higher production than that of a co-culture initiated with a 10-
fold lower E. coli inoculum and kept under the same light
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
G


--- Page 8 ---
conditions (8.7 ± 0.2 mg/L), indicating that higher levels of
the ﬁrst module are beneﬁcial but must be carefully regulated.
Additionally, production is completely abolished when the
S. cerevisiae inoculum is reduced 10-fold, emphasizing the
importance of having an abundance of the second yeast
module. Nevertheless, these results conﬁrm that the additional
degree of freedom aﬀorded by optogenetic controls of co-
cultures is applicable to multiple biosynthetic pathways.
■CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we establish tunable control of microbial
consortia using light, which addresses the longstanding
challenge of dynamically regulating population dynamics for
optimal co-culture fermentation performance. Our OptoTA
circuit is not tethered to the properties of a speciﬁc metabolic
pathway, allowing it to function independently of strain
modiﬁcations (such as gene overexpression or deletions)
catered to speciﬁc biosynthetic pathways, and requiring only
that the endogenous mazEF genes are deleted. We
demonstrate this advantage by using OptoTA to control co-
culture production of two chemicals derived from very
diﬀerent metabolic pathways: isobutyl acetate (central carbon
metabolism, branched-chain alcohol biosynthesis) and nar-
ingenin (aromatic amino acid biosynthesis). Previous studies
using monocultures of more extensively engineered strains and
optimized fermentations have reported yields higher than what
we obtained.54,55 However, while such additional genetic
interventions could be implemented in our strains to further
increase production, the goal of our study is to provide a proof
of principle that light can be used as a ﬂexible agent to
dynamically control co-culture populations during fermenta-
tions to optimize production of diverse chemicals.
Optogenetics provides a unique advantage as using light
allows for continuous control of population dynamics, even
once the fermentation has started and the inoculum can no
longer be adjusted. In this sense, light regulation of microbial
growth provides a new degree of freedom to optimize chemical
production. This is demonstrated in the ability to increase
titers of both isobutyl acetate and naringenin by manipulating
both light condition and inoculation sizes of bacteria and yeast
(Figures 3d, 4d), with light schedules being capable of
boosting production by as much as 3.6-fold in co-cultures
initiated with the most productive inoculums (Figure 3d). The
light duty cycle in some fermentations may in fact determine
production above inoculation size, as seen by the higher
naringenin production in 10% light dose (with 0.5:10
E. coli:S. cerevisiae inoculums) compared to production in
100% light in co-culture fermentations initiated with 10-fold
higher bacterial inoculums (Figure 4d). While experimentation
is still necessary to determine the optimal population
composition for maximal chemical production, optogenetic
controls allow for increased throughput of testing, population
adjustment in response to potential perturbations, and further
optimization once a productive inoculation regime has been
found. Such advantages make light a powerful new variable to
dynamically control consortia populations for fermentations
and metabolic engineering applications.
Dividing metabolic pathways into submodules within
diﬀerent strains allows for optimization of individual modules
without genetically or metabolically overburdening a single
strain. By using E. coli to produce isobutanol and tyrosine at
high levels, we avoid extensive genetic modiﬁcation of
S. cerevisiae, which endogenously regulates production of
both molecules.6,56 In doing so, we can focus engineering of
the yeast module on overproducing other precursorsacetyl-
CoA for isobutyl acetate, malonyl-CoA for naringenin, which
compete for pyruvate with the upstream modulesas well as
downstream biosynthesis of the ﬁnal products. Production
could likely be improved by increasing the copy number of
bottleneck enzymes,57 deleting competing endogenous en-
zymes,54,58 increasing transport of intermediates between
modules,59 and developing a media formulation that better
balances the needs of both species.60 More granular
experimentation with diﬀerent inoculation sizes and ratios,
which can then be dynamically diﬀerentiated using varying
light doses, would likely further increase production. Addi-
tionally, optimization of process variables, such as fermentation
length and controlling pH and oxygenation, should reveal
productive inoculation sizes that are lower than those used in
this study. Nevertheless, our results conclusively demonstrate
that light can be used to control and optimize chemical
production from microbial consortia.
OptoTA functions by regulating the expression levels of the
mazEF toxin-antitoxin system, which is endogenous to E. coli
(Figure 1a). MazEF-like paralogs have been discovered in
other bacterial species,61 raising the possibility that OptoTA
could be directly used in other bacterial species to impart
optogenetic growth control, while likely exhibiting less cross-
talk with endogenous systems. Alternatively, the architecture of
OptoTA could feasibly be applied to control other toxin-
antitoxin systems, which are ubiquitous in nature,62 enabling
optogenetic regulation of cell growth in diverse bacterial
genera such as Corynebacterium, Bacillus, Pseudomonas, or
Lactococcus using diﬀerent toxin-antitoxin pairs. Building
redundancies by simultaneously using multiple TA systems
(including with diﬀerent mechanisms of action) in a single
strain could help attain more stringent growth control and
attenuate the variability observed in diﬀerent media (Figures
1b and 2a). Light-dependent growth of other commonly used
model organisms, each with its own advantages, could make
diﬀerent types of light-controlled microbial consortia viable for
a variety of biotechnological applications.
OptoTA uses single-input (blue light) control over consortia
in which the growth rates of two species are heavily stratiﬁed,
such as the E. coli−S. cerevisiae co-culture we use in this study.
This strategy is extendable to situations in which fermentation
conditions (pH, temperature, oxygenation, media) are
disadvantageous to one organism. It could potentially also be
used for co-cultures featuring two diﬀerent strains of the same
species but containing genetic modiﬁcations that diverge their
growth rates. Fermentations for chemical production in lab-
scale bioreactors have been optogenetically controlled using
pDawn.26 However, at larger scales, in which light penetration
may become limiting,63 YF1 mutants with increased light
sensitivity64 could be incorporated to achieve the required light
stimulation. OptoTA establishes light control over the faster
growing strain irrespective of process conditions or genetic
background, allowing for ﬂexible implementation of co-cultures
for a wide variety of conditions and applications.
However, orthogonal optogenetic growth regulators that
respond to stimuli other than blue light could be developed
and used alongside OptoTA to eﬀectively engineer and control
more complex microbial co-cultures. Additional optogenetic
systems that respond to darkness28 could be employed to allow
opposing growth in co-cultured species in the presence or
absence of light. Alternatively, optogenetic systems such as
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
H


--- Page 9 ---
those based on phytochromes and cyanobacteriochromes,65,66
which respond to green, red, and far-red light, could enable
decoupled control of multiple species using diﬀerent wave-
lengths. Such polychromatic multi-input growth controls could
be used to dynamically regulate population of consortia with
more complex functions, including those that feature strains or
species with similar growth proﬁles or contain more than two
members.
The improved control of optogenetics over co-culture
fermentations raises a unique optimization problem: how to
adjust the timing and duration of light pulses to optimize
populations to maximize production from co-cultures. Previous
studies have investigated in silico approaches to analyze (and
potentially engineer) interpopulation dynamics in microbial
communities,67,68 as well as computer-assisted control of
optogenetic inputs to stabilize gene expression proﬁles toward
desired set points.69 Moving forward, kinetic models could be
designed based on growth data (species, light control) and
pathway information (precursor supply, metabolic branch
points) to predict highly productive population regimes for
diﬀerent products a priori, as well as to implement control
strategies to keep a co-culture within these desired regimes via
well-timed light pulses. Similar to this study, populations could
be distinguished using ﬂuorescent markers, or other quickly
measurable outputs such as pH, oxygenation, and temperature,
to provide live feedback to the optogenetic controller. Such
“cybergenetic” approaches could substantially increase the
throughput of process optimization while alleviating the
burden of user control over implementing complex light
schedules.70
Optogenetic regulation of populations in microbial com-
munities constitutes a new paradigm that could impact the
ﬁelds of metabolic engineering, fermentation technology, and
beyond. The unique advantages that light provides can make it
possible to identify and maintain optimal microbial popula-
tions throughout fermentation for maximal chemical produc-
tion. Optogenetics could thus help resolve the long-standing
challenge of population control in co-culture fermentations
and help realize the full potential of improving biosynthesis of
complex chemical products by microbial division of labor. This
study also oﬀers a blueprint to establish optogenetic controls of
microbial communities in diﬀerent settings such as in the areas
of bioremediation,71 agriculture and food technology,72,73 and
microbiome research.74
■METHODS
Plasmid and Strain Construction. Plasmids were cloned
into E. coli strain DH5α made chemically competent using the
Inoue method as previously described.75 Transformants were
inoculated on LB agar plates with appropriate antibiotics: 100
μg/mL ampicillin, 100 μg/mL carbenicillin, 50 μg/mL
kanamycin, or 34 μg/mL chloramphenicol. Epoch DNA
Miniprep, Omega E.Z.N.A. Gel Extraction, and Omega
E.Z.N.A. Cycle Pure kits were used to extract and purify
plasmids and DNA fragments. Genes were ampliﬁed from
bacterial or yeast genomic DNA or lab plasmids. Backbones
and inserts were either digested using restriction enzymes
purchased from NEB or PCR ampliﬁed using CloneAmp HiFi
PCR premix from Takara Bio. Primers were ordered from
Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). Gibson
isothermal assembly was performed based on previously
described protocols.76 For S. cerevisiae constructs, we cloned
promoter-gene-terminator sequences into standardized vector
series (pJLA vectors) as previously described77 (Supplemen-
tary Figure S5). All plasmids were veriﬁed using Sanger
sequencing from Genewiz. We avoid using tandem repeats to
prevent recombination after transformation, and thus do not
observe instability of strains or plasmids. A detailed description
of all the plasmids used in this study can be found in
Supplementary Table S1.
Plasmids pDusk and pDawn were obtained as a gift from
Andreas Möglich (Addgene #43795 and #43796, respec-
tively).39 The sequence for the acs (L641P) gene from
Salmonella enterica was codon-optimized for expression in
S. cerevisiae and synthesized by Bio Basic’s gene synthesis
service.
Bacterial and Yeast Transformations. Deletion of
endogenous mazEF in E. coli was performed using the
Datsenko−Wanner method.78 Cells were made electro-
competent and electroporated as described previously.79
FRT-ﬂanked resistance markers were cured using FLP
recombinase from pCP20.80 Gene deletions were genotyped
by sequencing PCR products ampliﬁed from puriﬁed genomic
DNA using primers ﬂanking the region of deletion.
Yeast transformations were carried out using standard
lithium acetate protocols as previously described. Gene
constructs derived from pYZ16263 or pYZ2328 vectors were
linearized with PmeI and genomically integrated into the LEU2
locus or δ-sites (YARCdelta5), respectively. Zeocin (purchased
from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) was used at a concentration of
1200 μg/mL to select for δ-integration. Detailed descriptions
of all bacterial and yeast strains used in this study can be found
in Supplementary Tables S2 and S3, respectively.
Microbial Cell Culture Growth and Measurements.
Single colonies from agar plates were inoculated into liquid
media and grown in 96-well (USA Scientiﬁc Item #CC7672−
7596) or 24-well (USA Scientiﬁc Item #CC7672−7524) plates
at 30 °C and shaken at 200 rpm (19 mm orbital diameter). For
E. coli experiments, unless otherwise stated, we used M9
minimal salts buﬀer containing 2% glucose, 0.2% w/v casamino
acids (Bio Basic), K3 trace metal mixture,43 and appropriate
antibiotics using the previously speciﬁed concentrations
(hereafter referred to as M9 medium). For S. cerevisiae
experiments, we used yeast nitrogen base (YNB) or synthetic
complete (SC: YNB supplemented with amino acids) dropout
media containing 2% glucose.81 YNB media was supplemented
with 0.3 mM histidine, 1.67 mM leucine, 0.2 mM uracil, and
0.4 mM tryptophan for strains with these auxotrophies. For
experiments involving characterization of E. coli and S. cerevisiae
growth in consortium in deﬁned media, we used YNB or SC
media containing 2% glucose, either M9 minimal salts buﬀer or
K3 salts (31) buﬀer, and appropriate antibiotics. For chemical
production experiments, we used a previously published21
medium formulation: 13.3 g/L KH2PO4, 4 g/L (NH4)2HPO4,
1.7 g/L citric acid, 5 g/L yeast extract, K3 trace metal mixture,
4% glucose, and appropriate antibiotics (hereafter referred to
as ESC medium).
To stimulate cells with blue (465 nm) light, we used LED
panels (HQRP New Square 12” Grow Light Blue LED 14W)
placed above the culture plates such that light intensity was
between 80 and 110 μmol/m2/s as measured using a Quantum
meter (Apogee Instruments, Model MQ-510). To control light
duty cycles, LED panels were regulated with a Nearpow
Multifunctional Inﬁnite Loop Programmable Plug-in Digital
Timer Switch.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
I


--- Page 10 ---
To measure cell concentration, optical density measure-
ments were taken at 600 nm (OD600), using media (exposed to
the same light and incubation conditions as the bacteria/yeast
cultures) as blank. Measurements were taken using a TECAN
plate reader (inﬁnite M200PRO) or Eppendorf spectropho-
tometer (BioSpectrometer basic) with a microvolume
measuring cell (Eppendorf μCuvette G1.0), using samples
diluted to a range of OD600 between 0.1 and 1.0.
Flow Cytometry. To measure cell counts during co-culture
experiments, in which OD600 measurements can no longer be
correlated with cell densities of individual species, we used ﬂow
cytometry to distinguish populations of diﬀerent species.
Events were counted using ﬂuorescent counting beads
(Spherotech AccuCount Particles, ACFP-50-5) as a stopping
gate, until 100 counting beads were detected. GFP
ﬂuorescence (for detecting counting beads) was quantiﬁed
by ﬂow cytometry using a BD LSR II ﬂow cytometer (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and BD FacsDiva 8.0.2
software with a 488 nm laser and 525/50 nm bandpass ﬁlter.
Fluorescence from mCherry (for detecting E. coli) was
quantiﬁed with a 561 nm laser and 610/20 nm bandpass
ﬁlter. BFP ﬂuorescence (for detecting S. cerevisiae) was
quantiﬁed with a 405 nm laser and 450/50 nm bandpass ﬁlter.
The gating used in our analyses was deﬁned to exclude
particles that are either too small or too large to be single living
E. coli and S. cerevisiae cells or counting beads, based on the
side scatter (SSC-A) vs forward scatter (FSC-A) plots as well
as side scatter area (SSC-A) vs width (SSC-W) plots
(Supplementary Figure S2a−d). Within the single cell
populations, events with the correct ﬂuorescence (mCherry
for E. coli cells and TagBFP for S. cerevisiae cells) were gated
and considered for analysis (Supplementary Figure S2e).
Events that indicated yeast in size but emitted both mCherry
and TagBFP ﬂuorescence were considered as events in which
E. coli and yeast had stuck together; these counts were added
to both E. coli and S. cerevisiae populations. Single cell counts
obtained using counting beads correlated linearly with OD600
values for both E. coli and S. cerevisiae samples (Supplementary
Figure S2f,g).
Construction and Characterization of Light-Depend-
ent Bacterial and Yeast Strains. OptoTA was characterized
in E. coli strains derived from MO001 (MG1655 lacIq
ΔlacZYA::PT5_mCherry).82 The endogenous copies of mazE
and mazF were simultaneously knocked out of MO001 and the
kanamycin resistance marker removed through FLP-FRT
recombination to make EMAL142. A plasmid containing
pDawn controlling mazE and pDusk controlling mazF
(OptoTA, pMAL511) was used to transform electrocompetent
strain EMAL142 to make EMAL144. As a control, an empty
plasmid containing pDusk was used to transform strain
EMAL142 to make EMAL221.
To evaluate light dependence of E. coli growth in diﬀerent
media (Figure 1b), we inoculated 1 mL overnight cultures of
EMAL221 into M9 medium + kanamycin + 2% glucose, as well
as EMAL144 into M9 medium + kanamycin + 2% glucose,
glycerol, or xylose, or LB + kanamycin, under constant blue
light. The next day, we back-diluted the cultures into the same
media to OD600 = 0.01 in 1 mL into 24-well plates and grew
the cultures for 24 h (or 12 h for LB) under blue light or in the
dark, after which point OD600 measurements were taken.
To evaluate kinetics of E. coli growth using OptoTA under
diﬀerent light conditions (Figure 1c), we inoculated 1 mL
overnight cultures of EMAL144 and EMAL221 into M9
medium + kanamycin + 2% glucose media under blue light.
The next day, we back-diluted the cultures to OD600 = 0.01 in
1 mL into 24-well plates and grew the cultures until steady
state was reached. Light conditions tested for EMAL144 were
full blue light; pulses of 10 s ON/90 s OFF, 1 s ON/99 s OFF;
and full darkness (plates wrapped in aluminum foil). OD600
measurements were taken every 3−5 h.
Characterization of E. coli and S. cerevisiae Co-
cultures. To test the viability of E. coli and S. cerevisiae on
SC and M9 2% agar plates (Supplementary Figure S1a), we
inoculated 1 mL overnight cultures of EMAL144 into M9
medium + kanamycin + 2% glucose under constant blue light
and CEN.PK2−1C into SC + 2% glucose. The next day, we
streaked both strains out onto an M9 + kanamycin + 2%
glucose agar plate, as well as an SC + 2% glucose agar plate,
and incubated both plates under blue light at 30 °C for 36 h.
To screen for media formulations in which both E. coli and
S. cerevisiae could grow and in which OptoTA would still be
eﬀective (Figure 2a), we inoculated 1 mL overnight cultures of
EMAL144 into M9 medium + kanamycin + 2% glucose under
constant blue light. The next day, we back-diluted the cultures
to OD600 = 0.01 in 1 mL into 24-well plates into the following
media: YNB + M9 salts buﬀer (YNB-C); YNB + K3 salts
buﬀer; SC + M9 salts buﬀer; and SC + K3 salts buﬀer. All
media contained 2% glucose and kanamycin. We then grew the
cultures for 14 h under blue light or in the dark, after which
OD600 measurements were taken.
To characterize the growth of S. cerevisiae in YNB-C media
(Supplementary Figure S1b), we inoculated 1 mL overnight
cultures of CEN.PK2−1C into YNB + 2% glucose or YNB-C +
2% glucose. The next day, we back-diluted the cultures into the
same media to OD600 = 0.1 in 1 mL into 24-well plates and
grew the cultures until steady state.
To characterize potential toxic eﬀects of light toward
S. cerevisiae (Supplementary Figure S4), we inoculated 1 mL
overnight cultures of CEN.PK2−1C into SC + 2% glucose.
The next day, we back-diluted the cultures into the same media
to OD600 = 0.01 in 1 mL into 24-well plates under blue light
and darkness and grew the cultures until steady state.
To evaluate light-dependence of strains grown in consortium
(Figure 2c), we integrated constitutively expressed TagBFP
(pMAL653) into the LEU2 locus of CEN.PK2−1C to create
yMAL272. We inoculated overnight cultures of EMAL221,
EMAL144 (both of which express mCherry when induced with
IPTG), and yMAL272 separately in YNB-C + 2% glucose +
kanamycin media (under full blue light for EMAL144). The
next day, we used these overnight cultures to inoculate 150 μL
of fresh media (same medium as the overnights) + 1 mM
IPTG to induce mCherry expression, in 96-well plates to
calculated OD600 values of 10−5−10−3 for bacteria and 0.1−1
for yeast. The co-cultures were then grown at 30 °C under
diﬀerent blue light conditions, including full light; 10 s ON/90
s OFF pulses; and full darkness (plates wrapped in aluminum
foil). After 12 h, 5 μL of each culture was diluted into 95 μL of
ice-cold PBS containing the manufacturer’s recommended
concentration (500 μL of beads per 10 mL) of ﬂuorescent
counting beads for ﬂow cytometry analysis.
Development of Isobutanol-Producing E. coli and
Isobutyl Acetate-Producing S. cerevisiae. To make a light-
sensitive strain of E. coli that produces isobutanol, we
transformed electrocompetent EMAL142 with pMAL511
(containing OptoTA) as well as pMAL534 containing a ﬁve-
gene isobutanol biosynthesis pathway:26 acetolactate synthase
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
J


--- Page 11 ---
from Bacillus subtilis (alsS), acetohydroxyacid reductoisomer-
ase (ilvC), dihydroxyacid dehydratase (ilvD), 2-ketoacid
decarboxylase from Lactococcus lactis (kivd), and alcohol
dehydrogenase from L. lactis (adhA). The resulting strain,
EMAL274, was plated onto LB + kanamycin + ampicillin agar
under full light. As a light-insensitive control, electrocompetent
MG1655 was transformed with pMAL534 to create EMAL203,
which was plated onto LB + ampicillin agar. Eight colonies
were then used to inoculate 1 mL of M9 medium + 2% glucose
+ carbenicillin media in 24-well plates, grown overnight (under
blue light and + kanamycin for EMAL274). The next day, each
culture was back-diluted into the same media to an OD600 of
0.01 and grown for 12 h at 30 °C at 200 rpm (under blue light
for EMAL274). At this point, 50 μL of 40% glucose was added
to each culture, as well as 10.6 μL of 100 mM IPTG (ﬁnal
concentration of 1 mM). The plates were then sealed with
Nunc Sealing Tape (Thermo Scientiﬁc) to prevent evaporation
of isobutanol. The strains were fermented for 48 h under
ambient light for EMAL203 or 10% (10 s ON/90 s OFF) light
for EMAL274, after which samples were prepared for GC-FID
analysis as described below. The highest producing colony was
selected for subsequent optimization.
To ﬁnd the optimal cell density at which isobutanol
production is induced with IPTG (Figure 3b), we back-
diluted 1 mL overnight cultures of EMAL203 and EMAL274
to diﬀerent OD600 values (ranging from 0.005 to 0.3) in 1 mL
cultures of M9 medium + 2% glucose + carbenicillin (under
blue light and + kanamycin for EMAL274). The diﬀerent
dilutions were grown for 12 h, reaching diﬀerent OD600 values,
at which point the same fermentation procedure described
above was then followed.
To construct a S. cerevisiae strain that converts isobutanol to
isobutyl acetate, we integrated multiple copies of endogenous
alcohol acetyltransferase (ATF1) and feedback-insensitive
acetyl-CoA synthetase from Salmonella enterica (acsL641P)46
into δ-sites (YARCdelta5) of CEN.PK2−1C (linearized
pMAL788), creating yMAL362. Transformants were plated
on YPD agar overnight; the next day, colonies were replica
plated onto YPD agar supplemented with 1200 ng/μL Zeocin.
Eight colonies were then used to inoculate 1 mL overnight
cultures of SC + 2% glucose media in 24-well plates. The next
day, each culture was back-diluted to an OD600 of 0.1 in fresh
medium and grown for 24 h. The cultures were then
centrifuged in a Sorvall Legend XTR (Thermo Fisher) at
2000 rpm for 10 min and resuspended in fresh SC + 4%
glucose + 1 g/L isobutanol media, in plates that were sealed
with Nunc Sealing Tape. The cultures were fermented for 48 h,
after which samples were prepared for GC-FID analysis as
described below. The highest producing colony was selected
for subsequent analysis.
To ﬁnd the optimal cell density at which to feed isobutanol
to maximize isobutyl acetate production in this strain (Figure
3c), we back-diluted 1 mL overnight cultures of yMAL362 to
diﬀerent OD600 values (ranging from 0.01 to 0.3) in 1 mL
cultures of SC + 2% glucose. The diﬀerent dilutions were
grown for 12 h, reaching diﬀerent OD600 values, at which point
the same fermentation procedure described above was
followed.
To produce isobutyl acetate using an E. coli−S. cerevisiae
consortium (Figure 3d), we inoculated 50 mL overnight
cultures of EMAL203 or EMAL274 into M9 medium + 2%
glucose + carbenicillin media (under blue light and +
kanamycin for EMAL274), as well as yMAL362 into SC +
2% glucose media. These cultures were centrifuged at 3700
rpm for 10 min, resuspended in ESC + 4% glucose +
carbenicillin media (+ kanamycin for EMAL274), and back-
diluted to the following OD600 values: 0.05 or 0.5 for
EMAL203 and EMAL274; 0.2, 2, or 10 for yMAL362. The
plates were then sealed, and the co-cultures were fermented for
48 h under the following light conditions: full blue light, 10 s
ON/90 s OFF, 1 s ON/99 s OFF, or full darkness (plates
wrapped in aluminum foil). Co-cultures containing EMAL203
were grown in the dark, while monocultures of EMAL274 or
yMAL362 were grown under full blue light. After 48 h, samples
were centrifuged and collected for GC-FID analysis as
described below.
Development of Tyrosine-Producing E. coli and
Naringenin-Producing S. cerevisiae. To make a light-
sensitive strain of E. coli that produces tyrosine, we
transformed electrocompetent EMAL142 with pMAL511
(containing OptoTA), and plasmids pS4 and pY3, containing
11 genes combined that convert glucose into tyrosine:49
transketolase (tktA); phosphoenolpyruvate synthase (ppsA);
feedback-insensitive DAHP synthase (aroGD146N); DHQ
synthase (aroB); DHQ dehydratase (aroD); shikimate
dehydrogenase (aroE); shikimate kinase II (aroL); EPSP
synthase (aroA); chorismate synthase (aroC); feedback-
insensitive chorismate mutase/prephenate dehydrogenase
(tyrAM53I, A354V); and tyrosine aminotransferase (tyrB). The
resulting strain, EMAL374, was plated onto LB + kanamycin +
ampicillin + chloramphenicol agar plates and incubated under
full light. As a light-insensitive control, electrocompetent
MG1655 was transformed with pS4 and pY3 to create
EMAL60, which was plated onto LB + ampicillin +
chloramphenicol agar plates. Eight colonies were then used
to inoculate 1 mL of M9 medium + 2% glucose + carbenicillin
+ chloramphenicol media and grown overnight (under blue
light and + kanamycin for EMAL374). The next day, the same
procedures were followed as for isobutanol to identify the
highest producing colony; also sealing the plates, but with a
single hole poked to allow for limited aeration. After 48 h of
fermentation under ambient light for EMAL60 or 10% light for
EMAL374, samples were prepared for HPLC analysis as
described below. To ﬁnd the optimal cell density at which
tyrosine production is induced with IPTG (Figure 4b) we
followed the same procedure described above for isobutanol
production, except using both carbenicillin and chloramphe-
nicol for selection (with blue light and kanamycin added for
EMAL374).
To construct a S. cerevisiae strain that converts tyrosine into
naringenin, we integrated tyrosine ammonia-lyase from
Flavobacterium johnsoniaeu (FjTAL),50 4-coumarate-CoA
ligase 2 from Arabidopsis thaliana (At4CL2),51 chalcone
synthase from Hypericum androsaemum (HaCHS),51 chalcone
isomerase from Petunia hybrida (PhCHI),51 and feedback-
insensitive acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC1S650A, S1157A)52 into
the LEU2 locus of CEN.PK2−1C (linearized pMAL959),
creating yMAL485. Transformants were plated on SC −Leu +
2% glucose agar. Eight colonies were then used to inoculate 1
mL overnight cultures of SC + 2% glucose media. The next
day, the same procedures were followed as for isobutyl acetate,
using 1 g/L tyrosine in the media and sealed plates with a
single hole poked on the tape. After 48 h of fermentation,
samples were prepared for HPLC-MS analysis as described
below. The highest producing colony was selected for
subsequent analysis.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
K


--- Page 12 ---
To ﬁnd the optimal density at which to feed tyrosine to
maximize naringenin production (Figure 4c), we followed the
same procedure as above for isobutyl acetate production by
feeding tyrosine instead of isobutanol.
To produce naringenin using an E. coli−S. cerevisiae
consortium, we inoculated 50 mL overnight cultures of
EMAL60 or EMAL374 into M9 medium + 2% glucose +
carbenicillin + chloramphenicol media (under blue light and +
kanamycin for EMAL374), as well as yMAL485 into SC + 2%
glucose media. The next day, these cultures were centrifuged at
3700 rpm for 10 min, resuspended in ESC + 4% glucose +
carbenicillin + chloramphenicol media (+ kanamycin for
EMAL374), and back-diluted in 1 mL to the following
OD600 values: 0.5 or 5 for EMAL60 and EMAL374; and 1 or
10 for yMAL485. The plates were then sealed with a single
hole poked to allow for limited aeration, and the co-cultures
were fermented for 48 h under the following light conditions:
full blue light, 10 s ON/90 s OFF, 1 s ON/99 s OFF, or full
darkness (plates wrapped in aluminum foil). Co-cultures
containing EMAL60 were grown in the dark. After 48 h,
samples were centrifuged and collected for HPLC-MS analysis
as described below.
Fermentation Sample Preparation and Analytical
Methods. For isobutanol and isobutyl acetate, cultures were
centrifuged in a Sorvall Legend XTR at 2000 rpm for 10 min at
4 °C. Then, 500 μL of cell-free supernatant was mixed with 1
mL of ethyl acetate in a 2 mL microcentrifuge tube and
vortexed for 20 min, then centrifuged at 17 000 RCF in an
Eppendorf 5424 microcentrifuge for 15 min at 4 °C. Finally,
400 μL of the organic phase was transferred to an autosampler
vial for analysis. For tyrosine, cultures were centrifuged in a
Sorvall Legend XTR at 2000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Then,
800 μL of supernatant was transferred to a 1.5 mL
microcentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 17 000 RCF for 45
min at 4 °C. Finally, 250 μL of cell-free supernatant was
transferred to an autosampler vial for analysis. For naringenin,
500 μL of cell culture was mixed with 500 μL of ethanol in a
1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and vortexed for 20 min, then
centrifuged at 17 000 RCF for 45 min at 4 °C. Finally, 250 μL
of cell-free supernatant was transferred to an autosampler vial
for analysis.
Concentrations of isobutanol and isobutyl acetate were
quantiﬁed using an Agilent 7890B GC System equipped with a
ﬂame ionization detector (FID). Cultures were centrifuged in a
Sorvall Legend XTR at 2000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Then,
500 μL of cell-free supernatant was mixed with 1 mL of ethyl
acetate in a 2 mL microcentrifuge tube and vortexed for 20
min, then centrifuged at 17 000 RCF in an Eppendorf 5424
microcentrifuge for 15 min at 4 °C. Then, 500 μL of the
organic phase was transferred to an autosampler vial for
analysis. Samples were injected and subjected to a split (0.5 μL
injection volume; 1:20 split), using a constant helium ﬂow of
1.5 mL/min. Samples were separated using a DB-Wax column
(30 m length, 0.25 mm diameter, 0.5 μm ﬁlm) and a gradient
as follows: Initial oven temperature was held at 70 °C for 3
min, temperature was then ramped at a rate of 20 °C/min to
230 °C and held at that temperature for 5 min. Samples were
quantiﬁed using Flame-ionization detection (300 °C, H2 ﬂow
30 mL/min, Air ﬂow 400 mL/min, Makeup ﬂow 25 mL/min),
and compared to commercial standards (Sigma-Aldrich for
isobutanol; Alfa Aesar for isobutyl acetate).
Concentrations of tyrosine and naringenin were quantiﬁed
with high-performance liquid chromatography−mass spec-
trometry (HPLC-MS), using an Agilent 1260 Inﬁnity and
6120 instrument (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA,
USA). Samples were analyzed using Alltech Alltima C18
column (250 × 4.6 mm, 5 μm particle size) using 0.1% formic
acid in acetonitrile (Solvent A), 0.1% formic acid in water
(Solvent B) at 35 °C, a ﬂow rate of 0.3 mL/min, and the
following gradient method: start at 10% Solvent A; from 0 to
10 min, linear increase of Solvent A from 10% to 40%; from 10
to 15 min, linear increase of Solvent A from 40% to 60%; from
15 to 15.5 min, linear increase of Solvent A from 60% to 100%;
hold at 100% Solvent A from 15.5 to 21 min; linear decrease of
Solvent A from 100% to 10% A from 21 to 21.5 min; hold at
10% Solvent A from 21.5 to 28 min. Tyrosine was monitored
with a diode array detector (DAD) using a detection
wavelength of 270 nm. Naringenin was monitored using the
mass spectrometer under selective ion monitoring (SIM) using
the following settings: m/z = 271.1, Fragmentor = 100, Gain =
1.00, Dwell = 590 ms, %Rel Dwell = 100. To determine analyte
concentrations, peak areas were integrated and compared to
those of standard solutions for quantiﬁcation (Sigma-Aldrich
for tyrosine; Alfa Aesar for naringenin).
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182.
Supplementary Note on how pDusk and pDawn
function; characterization of bacterial and yeast growth
in standard and hybrid media; ﬂow cytometry gating
strategy; isobutanol production using a bacteria−yeast
consortium; yeast growth under blue light and darkness;
plasmid assembly diagram; tables of plasmids and
bacterial and yeast strains (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
José L. Avalos −Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, United States; The Andlinger Center for Energy and
the Environment and Department of Molecular Biology,
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, United
States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-7209-4208;
Email: javalos@princeton.edu
Authors
Makoto A. Lalwani −Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-4629-4131
Hinako Kawabe −Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, United States
Rebecca L. Mays −Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, United States
Shannon M. Hoﬀman −Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New
Jersey 08544, United States
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
L


--- Page 13 ---
Author Contributions
M.A.L. and J.L.A. conceived this project and designed the
experiments. M.A.L. and H.K. constructed the strains and
plasmids. M.A.L., H.K., R.L.M., and S.M.H. executed the
experiments. M.A.L. and J.L.A. analyzed the data and wrote the
paper.
Funding
This work was supported by Princeton SEAS Project-X, the
U.S. Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce of
Biological and Environmental Research Award Number DE-
SC0019363, the NSF CAREER Award CBET-1751840, The
Pew Charitable Trusts, and The Camille Dreyfus Teacher-
Scholar Award.
Notes
The authors declare the following competing ﬁnancial
interest(s): The authors have applied for a patent for some
of the technologies described in this study.
The authors declare that all data supporting the ﬁndings of this
study are available within the paper (and its Supporting
Information ﬁles), but original data that supports the ﬁndings
are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Dr. Mark Brynildsen for suggesting the
MazEF system to control E. coli growth, as well as to Dr.
Wendy Mok for assistance with E. coli protocols and sharing
expertise with the MazEF system. We thank Dr. Christina
DeCoste, Dr. Katherine Rittenbach, and the Princeton
Molecular Biology Flow Cytometry Resource Center for
assistance with ﬂow cytometry experiments. E. coli and
S. cerevisiae cells and proteins in the TOC ﬁgure were created
using Biorender.com.
■REFERENCES
(1) Bailey, J. E. (1991) Toward a science of metabolic engineering.
Science (Washington, DC, U. S.) 252, 1668−1675.
(2) Lalwani, M. A., Zhao, E. M., and Avalos, J. L. (2018) Current
and future modalities of dynamic control in metabolic engineering.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 52, 56−65.
(3) Hammer, S. K., and Avalos, J. L. (2017) Harnessing yeast
organelles for metabolic engineering. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 823−832.
(4) Portnoy, V. A., Bezdan, D., and Zengler, K. (2011) Adaptive
laboratory evolutionharnessing the power of biology for metabolic
engineering. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 22, 590−594.
(5) Wu, G., Yan, Q., Jones, J. A., Tang, Y. J., Fong, S. S., and Koffas,
M. A. G. (2016) Metabolic Burden: Cornerstones in Synthetic
Biology and Metabolic Engineering Applications. Trends Biotechnol.
34, 652−664.
(6) Luttik, M. A. H., Vuralhan, Z., Suir, E., Braus, G. H., Pronk, J. T.,
and Daran, J. M. (2008) Alleviation of feedback inhibition in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae aromatic amino acid biosynthesis: Quanti-
fication of metabolic impact. Metab. Eng. 10, 141−153.
(7) Hausjell, J., Schendl, D., Weissensteiner, J., Molitor, C.,
Halbwirth, H., and Spadiut, O. (2020) Recombinant production of
a hard-to-express membrane-bound cytochrome P450 in different
yeastsComparison of physiology and productivity. Yeast 37, 217−
226.
(8) Kim, S., and Hahn, J. S. (2015) Efficient production of 2,3-
butanediol in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by eliminating ethanol and
glycerol production and redox rebalancing. Metab. Eng. 31, 94−101.
(9) Pyne, M. E., Narcross, L., Melgar, M., Kevvai, K., Mookerjee, S.,
Leite, G. B., and Martin, V. J. J. (2018) An Engineered Aro1 Protein
Degradation Approach for Increased cis,cis-Muconic Acid Biosyn-
thesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 84, 1−14.
(10) Sahdev, S., Khattar, S. K., and Saini, K. S. (2007) Production of
active eukaryotic proteins through bacterial expression systems: A
review of the existing biotechnology strategies. Mol. Cell. Biochem.
307, 249−264.
(11) Jawed, K., Yazdani, S. S., and Koffas, M. A. (2019) Advances in
the development and application of microbial consortia for metabolic
engineering. Metab. Eng. Commun. 9, No. e00095.
(12) Bader, J., Mast-Gerlach, E., Popović, M. K., Bajpai, R., and
Stahl, U. (2010) Relevance of microbial coculture fermentations in
biotechnology. J. Appl. Microbiol. 109, 371−387.
(13) Zhang, H., Pereira, B., Li, Z., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2015)
Engineering Escherichia coli coculture systems for the production of
biochemical products. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112, 8266−8271.
(14) Yuan, S. F., Yi, X., Johnston, T. G., and Alper, H. S. (2020) De
novo resveratrol production through modular engineering of an
Escherichia coli −Saccharomyces cerevisiae co - culture. Microb. Cell
Fact. 19, 1−12.
(15) Li, Z., Wang, X., and Zhang, H. (2019) Balancing the non-
linear rosmarinic acid biosynthetic pathway by modular co-culture
engineering. Metab. Eng., DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2019.03.002.
(16) Brethauer, S., and Studer, M. H. (2014) Consolidated
bioprocessing of lignocellulose by a microbial consortium. Energy
Environ. Sci. 7, 1446−1453.
(17) Wang, Z., Cao, G., Zheng, J., Fu, D., Song, J., Zhang, J., Zhao,
L., and Yang, Q. (2015) Developing a mesophilic co-culture for direct
conversion of cellulose to butanol in consolidated bioprocess.
Biotechnol. Biofuels 8, 84.
(18) Minty, J. J., Singer, M. E., Scholz, S. A., Bae, C.-H., Ahn, J.-H.,
Foster, C. E., Liao, J. C., and Lin, X. N. (2013) Design and
characterization of synthetic fungal-bacterial consortia for direct
production of isobutanol from cellulosic biomass. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 110, 14592−7.
(19) Guleria, S., Zhou, J., and Koffas, M. A. G. (2016) Nutraceuticals
(Vitamin C, Carotenoids, Resveratrol). Ind. Biotechnol, 309.
(20) Ganesan, V., Li, Z., Wang, X., and Zhang, H. (2017)
Heterologous biosynthesis of natural product naringenin by co-
culture engineering. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 2, 236−242.
(21) Zhou, K., Qiao, K., Edgar, S., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2015)
Distributing a metabolic pathway among a microbial consortium
enhances production of natural products. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 377−
383.
(22) Dinh, C. V., Chen, X., and Prather, K. L. J. (2020)
Development of a Quorum-Sensing Based Circuit for Control of
Coculture Population Composition in a Naringenin Production
System. ACS Synth. Biol. 9, 590.
(23) Li, Z., Wang, H., Ding, D., Liu, Y., Fang, H., Chang, Z., Chen,
T., and Zhang, D. (2020) Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli
for production of chemicals derived from the shikimate pathway. J.
Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 47, 525.
(24) Zhao, E. M., Lalwani, M. A., Lovelett, R. J., García-Echaurí, S.
A., Hoffman, S. M., Gonzalez, C. G., Toettcher, J. E., Kevrekidis, I. G.,
and Avalos, J. L. (2020) Design and characterization of rapid
optogenetic circuits for dynamic control in yeast metabolic engineer-
ing. ACS Synth. Biol. 9, 3254−3266.
(25) Wu, P., Chen, Y., Liu, M., Xiao, G., and Yuan, J. (2021)
Engineering an Optogenetic CRISPRi Platform for Improved
Chemical Production. ACS Synth. Biol. 10, 125.
(26) Lalwani, M. A., Ip, S. S., Carrasco-lópez, C., Day, C., Zhao, E.
M., Kawabe, H., and Avalos, J. L. (2021) Optogenetic control of the
lac operon for bacterial chemical and protein production. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 17, 71−79.
(27) Milias-Argeitis, A., Rullan, M., Aoki, S. K., Buchmann, P., and
Khammash, M. (2016) Automated optogenetic feedback control for
precise and robust regulation of gene expression and cell growth. Nat.
Commun. 7, 12546.
(28) Zhao, E. M., Zhang, Y., Mehl, J., Park, H., Lalwani, M. A.,
Toettcher, J. E., and Avalos, J. L. (2018) Optogenetic regulation of
engineered cellular metabolism for microbial chemical production.
Nature 555, 683−687.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
M


--- Page 14 ---
(29) Chan, C. T. Y., Lee, J. W., Cameron, D. E., Bashor, C. J., and
Collins, J. J. (2016) Deadman” and “Passcode” microbial kill switches
for bacterial containment. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 82−86.
(30) Rovner, A. J., Haimovich, A. D., Katz, S. R., Li, Z., Grome, M.
W., Gassaway, B. M., Amiram, M., Patel, J. R., Gallagher, R. R.,
Rinehart, J., and Isaacs, F. J. (2015) Recoded organisms engineered to
depend on synthetic amino acids. Nature 518, 89−93.
(31) Cai, Y., Agmon, N., Choi, W. J., Ubide, A., Stracquadanio, G.,
Caravelli, K., Hao, H., Bader, J. S., and Boeke, J. D. (2015) Intrinsic
biocontainment: Multiplex genome safeguards combine transcrip-
tional and recombinational control of essential yeast genes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112, 1803−1808.
(32) Aizenman, E., Engelberg-Kulka, H., and Glaser, G. (1996) An
Escherichia coli chromosomal “addiction module” regulated by 3′,5′-
bispyrophosphate: A model for programmed bacterial cell death. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 6059−6063.
(33) Kamada, K., Hanaoka, F., and Burley, S. K. (2003) Crystal
structure of the MazE/MazF complex: Molecular bases of antidote-
toxin recognition. Mol. Cell 11, 875−884.
(34) Tripathi, A., Dewan, P. C., Siddique, S. A., and Varadarajan, R.
(2014) MazF-induced growth inhibition and persister generation in
escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 4191−4205.
(35) Amitai, S., Yassin, Y., and Engelberg-kulka, H. (2004) MazF-
Mediated Cell Death in Escherichia coli : a Point of No Return. J.
Bacteriol. 186, 8295−8300.
(36) Mok, W. W. K., Park, J. O., Rabinowitz, J. D., and Brynildsen,
M. P. (2015) RNA futile cycling in model persisters derived from
mazF accumulation. mBio 6, 1−13.
(37) Kojima, H., Ogawa, Y., Kawamura, K., and Sano, K. (2004)
Method of producing L-lysine by fermentation, US Pat. EP1477565A1.
(38) Rodriguez, A., Martnez, J. A., Flores, N., Escalante, A., Gosset,
G., and Bolivar, F. (2014) Engineering Escherichia coli to over-
produce aromatic amino acids and derived compounds. Microb. Cell
Fact. 13, 126.
(39) Ohlendorf, R., Vidavski, R. R., Eldar, A., Moffat, K., and
Möglich, A. (2012) From dusk till dawn: One-plasmid systems for
light-regulated gene expression. J. Mol. Biol. 416, 534−542.
(40) Moglich, A., Ayers, R. A., and Moffat, K. (2009) Design and
Signaling Mechanism of Light-Regulated Histidine Kinases. J. Mol.
Biol. 385, 1433−1444.
(41) Helmstetter, C. E. (1967) Rate of DNA synthesis during the
division cycle of Escherichia coli B/r. J. Mol. Biol. 24, 417−427.
(42) Olivares-Marin, I. K., González-Hernández, J. C., Regalado-
Gonzalez, C., and Madrigal-Perez, L. A. (2018) Saccharomyces
cerevisiae exponential growth kinetics in batch culture to analyze
respiratory and fermentative metabolism. J. Visualized Exp. 2018, 1−
10.
(43) Zhou, K., Edgar, S., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2016)
Engineering Microbes to Synthesize Plant Isoprenoids. In Methods
Enzymol., 1st ed., Elsevier Inc.
(44) Zhang, W., Liu, H., Li, X., Liu, D., Dong, X. T., Li, F. F., Wang,
E. X., Li, B. Z., and Yuan, Y. J. (2017) Production of naringenin from
D-xylose with co-culture of E. coli and S. cerevisiae. Eng. Life Sci. 17,
1021−1029.
(45) Tashiro, Y., Desai, S. H., and Atsumi, S. (2015) Two-
dimensional isobutyl acetate production pathways to improve carbon
yield. Nat. Commun. 6, 1−9.
(46) Shiba, Y., Paradise, E. M., Kirby, J., Ro, D. K., and Keasling, J.
D. (2007) Engineering of the pyruvate dehydrogenase bypass in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae for high-level production of isoprenoids.
Metab. Eng. 9, 160−168.
(47) Lian, J., Si, T., Nair, N. U., and Zhao, H. (2014) Design and
construction of acetyl-CoA overproducing Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strains. In Food, Pharm. Bioeng. Div. 2014 - Core Program. Area 2014
AIChE Annu. Meet., Vol. 2, pp 750−760.
(48) Koopman, F., Beekwilder, J., Crimi, B., van Houwelingen, A.,
Hall, R. D., Bosch, D., van Maris, A. J., Pronk, J. T., and Daran, J.-M.
(2012) De novo production of the flavonoid naringenin in engineered
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb. Cell Fact. 11, 155.
(49) Juminaga, D., Baidoo, E. E. K., Redding-Johanson, A. M., Batth,
T. S., Burd, H., Mukhopadhyay, A., Petzold, C. J., and Keasling, J. D.
(2012) Modular engineering of L-tyrosine production in Escherichia
coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78, 89−98.
(50) Rodriguez, A., Chen, Y., Khoomrung, S., Özdemir, E.,
Borodina, I., and Nielsen, J. (2017) Comparison of the metabolic
response to over-production of p -coumaric acid in two yeast strains.
Metab. Eng. 44, 265−272.
(51) Skjoedt, M. L., Snoek, T., Kildegaard, K. R., Arsovska, D.,
Eichenberger, M., Goedecke, T. J., Rajkumar, A. S., Zhang, J.,
Kristensen, M., Lehka, B. J., Siedler, S., Borodina, I., Jensen, M. K.,
and Keasling, J. D. (2016) Engineering prokaryotic transcriptional
activators as metabolite biosensors in yeast. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 951−
958.
(52) Shi, S., Chen, Y., Siewers, V., and Nielsen, J. (2014) Improving
production of malonyl coenzyme A-derived metabolites by abolishing
Snf1-dependent regulation of Acc1. mBio 5, 1−8.
(53) Fang, Z., and Bhandari, B. (2010) Encapsulation of polyphenols
−a review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 21, 510−523.
(54) Tai, Y. S., Xiong, M., and Zhang, K. (2015) Engineered
biosynthesis of medium-chain esters in Escherichia coli. Metab. Eng.
27, 20−28.
(55) Li, H., Gao, S., Zhang, S., Zeng, W., and Zhou, J. (2021) Effects
of metabolic pathway gene copy numbers on the biosynthesis of (2S)-
naringenin in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biotechnol. 325, 119−127.
(56) Hammer, S. K., and Avalos, J. L. (2017) Uncovering the role of
branched-chain amino acid transaminases in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
isobutanol biosynthesis. Metab. Eng. 44, 302−312.
(57) Lyu, X., Ng, K. R., Lee, J. L., Mark, R., and Chen, W. N. (2017)
Enhancement of Naringenin Biosynthesis from Tyrosine by Metabolic
Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Agric. Food Chem. 65,
6638−6646.
(58) Du, Y., Yang, B., Yi, Z., Hu, L., and Li, M. (2020) Engineering
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Coculture Platform for the Production of
Flavonoids. J. Agric. Food Chem. 68, 2146−2154.
(59) Doroshenko, V., Airich, L., Vitushkina, M., Kolokolova, A.,
Livshits, V., and Mashko, S. (2007) YddG from Escherichia coli
promotes export of aromatic amino acids. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 275,
312−318.
(60) La, A., Perré, P., and Taidi, B. (2019) Process for symbiotic
culture of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Chlorella vulgaris for in situ
CO2 mitigation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 103, 731−745.
(61) Mittenhuber, G. (1999) MazEZ-like Systems in Bacteria 295
Occurence of MazEF-like Antitoxin/Toxin Systems in Bacteria JMMB
Mini-Review. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol 1, 295−302.
(62) Page, R., and Peti, W. (2016) Toxin-antitoxin systems in
bacterial growth arrest and persistence. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 208−214.
(63) Zhao, E. M., Lalwani, M. A., Chen, J., Orillac, P., Toettcher, J.
E., and Avalos, J. L. (2021) Optogenetic Amplification Circuits for
Light-Induced Metabolic Control. ACS Synth. Biol. 10 (5), 1143−
1154.
(64) Hennemann, J., Iwasaki, R. S., Grund, T. N., Diensthuber, R. P.,
Richter, F., and Möglich, A. (2018) Optogenetic Control by Pulsed
Illumination. ChemBioChem 19, 1296−1304.
(65) Hirose, Y., Shimada, T., Narikawa, R., Katayama, M., and
Ikeuchi, M. (2008) Cyanobacteriochrome CcaS is the green light
receptor that induces the expression of phycobilisome linker protein.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 105, 9528−9533.
(66) Ong, N. T., Olson, E. J., and Tabor, J. J. (2018) Engineering an
E. coli Near-Infrared Light Sensor. ACS Synth. Biol. 7, 240−248.
(67) Thommes, M., Wang, T., Zhao, Q., Paschalidis, I. C., and Segrè,
D. (2019) Designing Metabolic Division of Labor in Microbial
Communities. mSystems 4, 1−21.
(68) Gupta, S., Ross, T. D., Gomez, M. M., Grant, J. L., Romero, P.
A., and Venturelli, O. S. (2020) Investigating the dynamics of
microbial consortia in spatially structured environments. Nat.
Commun. 11, 1−15.
(69) Milias-Argeitis, A., Summers, S., Stewart-Ornstein, J., Zuleta, I.,
Pincus, D., El-Samad, H., Khammash, M., and Lygeros, J. (2011) In
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
N


--- Page 15 ---
silico feedback for in vivo regulation of a gene expression circuit. Nat.
Biotechnol. 29, 1114−1116.
(70) Carrasco-López, C., García-Echauri, S. A., Kichuk, T., and
Avalos, J. L. (2020) Optogenetics and biosensors set the stage for
metabolic cybergenetics. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 65, 296−309.
(71) Jariyal, M., Jindal, V., Mandal, K., Gupta, V. K., and Singh, B.
(2018) Bioremediation of organophosphorus pesticide phorate in soil
by microbial consortia. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 159, 310−316.
(72) Aguilar-Paredes, A., Valdés, G., and Nuti, M. (2020) Ecosystem
Functions of Microbial Consortia in Sustainable Agriculture.
Agronomy 10, 1902.
(73) Smid, E. J., and Lacroix, C. (2013) Microbe-microbe
interactions in mixed culture food fermentations. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 24, 148−154.
(74) Vázquez-Castellanos, J. F., Biclot, A., Vrancken, G., Huys, G. R.,
and Raes, J. (2019) Design of synthetic microbial consortia for gut
microbiota modulation. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 49, 52−59.
(75) Inoue, H., Nojima, H., and Okayama, H. (1990) High
efficiency transformation of Escherichia coli with plasmids. Gene 96,
23−28.
(76) Gibson, D. G, Young, L., Chuang, R.-Y., Venter, J C.,
Hutchison, C. A, and Smith, H. O (2009) Enzymatic assembly of
DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases. Nat. Methods 6,
343−345.
(77) Avalos, J. L., Fink, G. R., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2013)
Compartmentalization of metabolic pathways in yeast mitochondria
improves the production of branched-chain alcohols. Nat. Biotechnol.
31, 335−341.
(78) Datsenko, K. A., and Wanner, B. L. (2000) One-step
inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using
PCR products. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 6640−6645.
(79) Dower, W. J., Miller, J. F., and Ragsdale, C. W. (1988) High
efficiency transformation of E.coli by high voltage electroporation.
Nucleic Acids Res. 16, 6127−6145.
(80) Cherepanov, P. P., and Wackernagel, W. (1995) Gene
disruption in Escherichia coli: TcR and KmR cassettes with the
option of Flp-catalyzed excision of the antibiotic-resistance determi-
nant. Gene 158, 9−14.
(81) Sherman, F. (1991) Getting Started with Yeast. Methods
Enzymol. 194, 3−21.
(82) Orman, M. A., and Brynildsen, M. P. (2013) Dormancy Is Not
Necessary or Sufficient for Bacterial Persistence. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 57, 3230−3239.
ACS Synthetic Biology
pubs.acs.org/synthbio
Research Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00182
ACS Synth. Biol. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
O
