--- Page 1 ---
 
1 
 
Peptide sequencing via reverse translation of peptides into DNA 
Liwei Zheng1*, Yujia Sun1, Michael Eisenstein1,2, Hyongsok Tom Soh1,2,3* 
Affiliations 
 
1Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
2Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
3Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
*Corresponding authors. Email: lwzheng@stanford.edu, tsoh@stanford.edu 
 
Abstract: Scalable methods that can accurately sequence peptides at single-amino acid resolution 
could significantly advance proteomic studies. We present a protein sequencing method based on 
the “reverse translation” of peptide sequence information into DNA barcodes that document the 
identity, position, and the originating peptide of each amino acid. We employ a modified Edman 
degradation process that converts peptides into DNA-barcoded amino acids, which are 
subsequently detected by proximity extension assay, yielding multi-barcoded DNA outputs that 
can be PCR amplified and sequenced. Using our method, we sequenced multiple consecutive 
amino acids within a model peptide. This method also enables the differentiation of single amino 
acid substitutions, and the identification of post-translational modifications and their positions 
within multiple peptides simultaneously. With further development, we anticipate that this method 
will enable highly parallel de novo protein sequencing with single-molecule sensitivity. 
 
 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 2 ---
 
2 
 
Introduction 
Single-cell transcriptomics has matured into a powerful method for directly quantifying the 
heterogeneous functional impact of genomic variations, environmental stimuli, and other 
physiological factors in different cell types and populations.(1–3) Although messenger RNA 
(mRNA) transcripts are a highly informative indicator of gene expression activity, the 
consequences of changes in expression can only be fully understood by assessing a cell’s protein 
content. This is because the final outcome of mRNA translation is heavily influenced by the effects 
of translational regulation and kinetics, post-translational modification (PTM), and other 
biochemical processes.(4, 5) Unfortunately, the toolbox for single-cell proteomics is still in its 
nascency. Advances in mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation and techniques, such as 
multiplexed isobaric labeling, have enabled the quantification of ~3,000 proteins from individual 
cells.(6–9) However, MS still lacks the dynamic range and sensitivity to document the full breadth 
of the cellular proteome.(10–12) This has spurred considerable interest in the development of 
technologies that enable single-molecule analysis and quantitation of proteins.  
The past several years have witnessed considerable progress in this domain, including several 
early-stage commercial platforms.(13) One category of approaches emulates nanopore-based 
DNA sequencing, wherein nucleotide sequences are determined based on real-time changes in 
ionic current that occur as stretches of nucleic acids are threaded through protein nanopores. 
Researchers have made substantial headway in developing similarly premised platforms that can 
mediate the controlled transit of unfolded proteins through nanopores.(14–18) In addition, two 
recent publications have shown that such approaches can identify all 20 natural amino acids as 
well as certain PTMs in their monomeric forms or when attached to a constant carrier peptide.(19, 
20) However, it remains unclear whether nanopore methods can consistently resolve individual 
amino acids in the context of a peptide,(16, 18) and true single-molecule protein sequencing with 
a nanopore-based system has yet to be demonstrated. Other methods employ an approach known 
as “fluorosequencing”, in which surface-conjugated proteins or peptides are selectively tagged 
with a range of amino acid-specific fluorescent labels.(21) In each round of sequencing, the 
proteins are imaged and then subjected to Edman degradation to iteratively trim away N-terminal 
amino acids. By matching labeled amino acids to specific positions on the peptide, one can identify 
many individual proteins in a highly parallel fashion. This approach is effective for high-level 
profiling of protein content, but fluorosequencing is inherently limited by the range of reagents 
available for selective amino acid labeling.(22, 23) Another recently developed approach exploits 
derivatives of the ClpS family proteins, which selectively recognize specific combinations of 
amino acids at the N-terminus of peptides.(13) Similar to fluorosequencing, the immobilized 
proteins are subjected to enzymatic N-terminal digestion to expose new amino acids for analysis. 
However, this approach is also limited in the range of amino acids that can be discriminated, 
particularly since each ClpS is also sensitive to the flanking residues in the peptide.(24, 25) As 
such, although significant progress is being made in terms of single-molecule protein profiling and 
quantitation, there is still an unmet need for methods that can accurately identify a wide range of 
proteins—including PTM variants—at a meaningful throughput. 
In this work, we present a novel method that could potentially deliver such capabilities. Our 
process uses DNA-tagged, amino acid-specific antibodies to enable the “reverse translation” of 
peptide sequences into barcoded DNA libraries that encode the amino acid sequence. This is done 
in iterative cycles, where a modified Edman degradation process is used to iteratively remove 
amino acids from the N-terminus of an immobilized peptide.(26) During this process, each amino 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 3 ---
 
3 
 
acid is tagged, before cleavage, with a DNA sequence that allows it to be traced back to the source 
peptide. The DNA-barcoded amino acids are subsequently detected with primer-tagged amino 
acid-specific antibodies, enabling PCR amplification of the barcode sequences. These can then be 
analyzed via high-throughput DNA sequencing methods, such that the resulting sequencing data 
reveal the identity, originating peptide, and position within that peptide for each amino acid. We 
initially demonstrate this method with a single seven-residue model peptide, and then explore the 
multiplexing potential of this approach by sequencing multiple peptide species simultaneously. 
We also demonstrate the feasibility of PTM mapping using antibodies that selectively bind and 
identify specific PTMs such as phosphotyrosine.  
Results and discussion 
Design of peptide sequencing via “reverse translation”  
We designed a three-stage process to reverse translate peptide sequence information to DNA. 
The first stage entails the conversion of peptides into DNA-barcoded amino acids (Fig. 1, stage 
1). To begin, the C-terminus of the peptides being sequenced are conjugated to beads modified 
with DNA-based peptide barcodes, which will subsequently be associated with a particular 
peptide. The immobilized DNA-barcoded peptides are then subjected to a modified version of the 
Edman degradation reaction. This reaction is a well-established tool for protein sequencing, where 
the N-terminal amino acid is conjugated to phenylisothiocyanate (PITC) and cleaved from the 
peptide under acidic conditions. The resulting degradation fragment is converted to a more stable 
form and identified, after which the process is repeated to identify the next amino acid. Reaction 
efficiency is generally not limited by amino acid identity or peptide charge states, and thus, Edman 
degradation can accommodate a wide range of peptide sequences.(21) In our particular 
implementation, an azide-modified PITC is used for N-terminus conjugation, which allows the 
click coupling of a dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO)-modified biotinylated primer that hybridizes with 
the peptide barcode DNA. The primer is then immediately extended by DNA polymerase, after 
which the Edman reaction is performed to cleave the N-terminal amino acid. This yields a 
degradation product that is covalently tagged with the complementary sequence of the peptide 
barcode.  
In the second stage, the DNA-barcoded degradation products are converted to DNA reporters 
via proximity extension assay (PEA; Fig. 1, stage 2).(27, 28) The DNA-barcoded degradation 
products are enriched by streptavidin (SA) pulldown and subsequently recognized by DNA-
barcoded amino acid-specific antibodies. The antibody-based identification of cleaved amino acids 
is more reliable compared to methods that attempt to detect N-terminal amino acids within the 
peptide context, since antibody binding will not be affected by neighboring amino acids. Binding 
events are recorded by PEA, where the resulting DNA reporters contain both the initial peptide-
specific barcodes and the antibody-specific barcodes. 
In the final stage, the DNA reporters generated by PEA from each cycle are tagged with cycle 
number barcodes during adaptor PCR before sequencing (Fig. 1, stage 3). This yields peptide 
sequence encoding DNA comprising a set of barcodes that specifically encode the identity, 
position, and originating peptide of each amino acid. This three-stage process is performed 
iteratively on the immobilized peptide, and the resulting DNA library is then sequenced, enabling 
the reconstruction of the amino acid sequence for each peptide present in the sample. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 4 ---
 
4 
 
 
Fig. 1. Overview of peptide sequencing via “reverse translation”. In stage 1, peptides are conjugated with peptide 
barcode DNA sequences immobilized on magnetic beads. A modified Edman degradation reaction is carried out using 
a PITC molecule modified with an azide group to enable click coupling to a DBCO-modified, biotinylated primer that 
hybridizes directly to the peptide barcode sequence. This primer is extended to record the peptide barcode before N-
terminal amino acid cleavage. In stage 2, the DNA-barcoded amino acids released after cleavage are pulled down by 
streptavidin (SA) beads via their biotin moiety. These immobilized amino acids are recognized by DNA-barcoded amino 
acid-specific antibodies, and the DNA-barcoded amino acids are subsequently converted into DNA reporters via 
proximity extension assay (PEA). In stage 3, the DNA reporters from each cycle are barcoded with cycle number 
barcodes during adaptor PCR, yielding a DNA sequence that encodes the identity, position, and originating peptide of 
each amino acid. The final DNA library produced by this process can then be sequenced in a single run, enabling the 
reconstruction of peptide sequences from the sample.  
 
DNA-compatible Edman degradation reaction 
Preserving DNA integrity during Edman degradation is critical to our “reverse translation” 
strategy. However, conventional Edman degradation employs harsh conditions that damage DNA 
(Fig. 2A).(29, 30) For instance, the trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) typically used during the cleavage 
reaction can cause proton-catalyzed deglycosylation. We, therefore, developed alternative reaction 
conditions that are compatible with DNA. BF3 etherate (BF3·Et2O)-induced Edman degradation in 
acetonitrile (40 mM BF3·Et2O, 5 min) has been reported to reduce proton-catalyzed racemization 
while completely cleaving PITC-modified N-terminal amino acids.(31, 32) Moreover, BF3 
methanol complex has been used as a non-depurinating detritylation reagent in DNA synthesis.(33) 
Encouraged by these reports, we hypothesized that DNA stability would be enhanced in a cleavage 
reaction mediated by BF3·Et2O in acetonitrile. 
However, no intact DNA was observed after 30 min when we treated an oligodeoxynucleotide 
(ODN) containing all four deoxynucleotides (ODN-1) with 40 mM BF3·Et2O in anhydrous 
acetonitrile (Fig. 2B). To better understand the lability of DNA during BF3·Et2O treatment, we 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 5 ---
 
5 
 
analyzed the degradation products formed by a poly-dT sequence bearing a single dA (5′-
d(T14AT4), ODN-S1) by MS (Fig. S1, A and B). The major product (m/z = 4,577.3) is consistent 
with depurination of the single dA and subsequent strand cleavage;(34) no cleavage events at dT 
sites were detected. A similar cleavage pattern was also observed for an oligonucleotide containing 
a single dG (5′-d(T14GT4), ODN-S2; Fig. S1, C and D). Based on these results, we concluded that 
the degradation of native DNA during BF3·Et2O treatment was largely due to the instability of 
purine deoxynucleotides. We therefore explored the use of chemically modified 7-deazapurine 
deoxynucleotides (c7dA and c7dG), which have been reported to be resistant to depurination.(35, 
36) We synthesized ODN-2, a modified version of ODN-1, in which dA and dG were substituted 
with c7dA and c7dG, respectively. This modified oligonucleotide was unaffected by BF3·Et2O 
treatment for 4 h (Fig. 2C). Given that N-terminal amino acid cleavage in the presence of 40 mM 
BF3·Et2O occurs within 5 min, the stability of 7-deazapurine-modified DNA should be more than 
sufficient for the Edman degradation process. Importantly, 7-deazapurine deoxynucleotide 
triphosphates are accepted by several commonly used DNA polymerases (e.g., Klenow fragment 
(exo-), Sequenase version 2.0, and Bst 3.0), and primer extension reactions using c7dATP and 
c7dGTP proceeded with efficiency comparable to that of dATP and dGTP (Fig. S2).  
 
Fig. 2. Developing a DNA-compatible Edman degradation reaction. (A) Reaction scheme of conventional Edman 
degradation (bottom) and the BF3·Et2O-mediated version presented in this work (top). The TFA used in conventional 
Edman degradation is incompatible with DNA. We instead use BF3·Et2O, which generates ATZ amino acids that are 
then converted to more synthetically accessible PTC amino acids under reducing, basic conditions. (B) HPLC 
chromatograms of oligonucleotide ODN-1 before (top) and after (bottom) treatment with 40 mM BF3·Et2O in anhydrous 
acetonitrile for 30 min. (C) MS spectra of oligonucleotide ODN-2 before (top) and after (bottom) treatment with 40 mM 
BF3·Et2O in anhydrous acetonitrile for 4 h. Inset: HPLC chromatograms of ODN-2 before and after the treatment. 
 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 6 ---
 
6 
 
As with the standard TFA-mediated cleavage reaction during Edman degradation, 
anilinothiazolinone (ATZ) amino acids are the major product of the BF3·Et2O-mediated 
degradation reaction.(31) However, ATZ amino acids are unstable and thus not suitable for 
antibody-based detection. To overcome this problem, we converted the ATZ amino acids into 
stable PTC amino acids under alkaline reducing conditions (Fig. 2A).(37, 38) Dithiothreitol (DTT) 
was added to inhibit oxidative degradation of PTC amino acids.(39) Importantly, PTC amino acids 
can readily be prepared by reacting PITC or its derivatives with amino acids, greatly simplifying 
the generation of antibodies against these modified amino acids. 
DNA-encoded Edman degradation 
We next developed a chemical process for iteratively barcoding the PTC amino acids generated 
by our modified Edman degradation reaction (Fig. 3A). We performed the degradation reaction 
on model peptides bearing an azidolysine immobilized onto magnetic beads, which simplifies 
solvent exchange during the multi-step chemical process while also increasing reagent 
accessibility to DNA-peptide conjugates when reactions are conducted in neat organic 
solvents.(40–42) To immobilize the azide-modified peptides, we prepared carboxylic acid beads 
conjugated with DBCO-modified barcode DNA. Because the conjugation of DNA onto the 
carboxylic acid beads and the conjugation of the DBCO functional group onto the peptide barcode 
DNA both utilize amino modification of DNA, we performed these reactions in a stepwise fashion. 
We first immobilized the 5′-amino-modified anchor DNA (ODN-3) onto the carboxylic acid beads 
by carbodiimide coupling.(43) We then enzymatically ligated DBCO-modified 5′-phosphorylated 
DNA containing the primer binding site (ODN-4) onto that anchor DNA (Fig. 3A, step 1) to form 
the complete peptide barcode DNA. Subsequently, we conjugated a seven amino acid (aa) peptide 
(FGGGGGX, X = azidolysine) to the DNA via a strain-promoted alkyne-azide cycloaddition 
(SPAAC) reaction (Fig. 3A, step 2), and reacted azide-modified PITC (1) with the N-terminus of 
the peptide (Fig. 3A, step 3). To evaluate the yield of each step, we synthesized a Cy3-labeled 
anchor DNA bearing an internal disulfide linkage (ODN-S10, Table S1), which enables the release 
of intermediates from the magnetic beads under reducing conditions. These released intermediates 
were then analyzed via gel electrophoresis. Step 1 to 3 all proceeded with near quantitative yields 
(Fig. 3B). 
For the barcode transfer step, we first conjugated a DBCO-modified primer (ODN-5) to the 
azide group on the PTC peptide via proximity SPAAC (Fig. 3A, step 4). Although SPAAC is 
generally limited by its relatively slow reaction rate (k = 0.2–0.5 M-1s-1),(44) we opted for this 
approach due to the susceptibility of the PTC group to oxidation by reactive oxygen species that 
are generated during copper (I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC).(45, 46) 
Fortunately, hybridization between the template and primer accelerated the SPAAC reaction by 
increasing the effective local concentration of reactants,(47) and we found that the primer 
conjugation reaction reached completion with peptide FGGGGGX within 10 min (Fig. 3B). In 
contrast, when the reaction was carried out using a non-complementary poly-dT sequence (ODN-
S11, Table S1), no detectable conjugation was observed after 10 min, highlighting the importance 
of DNA hybridization in accelerating the reaction. This rate acceleration of the proximity SPAAC 
reaction was general. The click reaction reached completion within 1 h for various peptides ranging 
from 10–30 aa in length and of varying rigidities (Fig. S3). 
The primer was subsequently extended using Klenow fragment (exo-) (Fig. 3A, step 5), after 
which the beads were subjected to Edman degradation with BF3·Et2O in acetonitrile (Fig. 3A, step 
6). During this step, we took advantage of the insolubility of DNA in acetonitrile,(48) which allows 
the DNA-barcoded ATZ amino acids to remain hybridized with the template DNA following the 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 7 ---
 
7 
 
cleavage reaction. The subsequent basic conversion reaction converts ATZ amino acids into stable 
PTC amino acids while also denaturing the duplex DNA, releasing the barcoded amino acids (Fig. 
3A, step 7).(37) The DBCO-modified primer (ODN-5) contains a dT5 region that enables the 
introduction of a Cy3-labeled complementary strand (ODN-S12, Table S1) via toehold-mediated 
strand displacement. This allowed us to quantify the yield of the cleavage and conversion reactions 
by flow cytometry. We confirmed the structure of the cleaved barcoded PTC amino acid via LC-
MS (Fig. 3C) and measured a cleavage yield of 96.9 ± 0.1% (Fig. 3D). We also validated that 
peptides bearing N-terminal glycine, tryptophan, tyrosine, aspartic acid, arginine or 
phosphotyrosine were compatible with this process. Correctly barcoded PTC amino acids were 
observed in all cases, with degradation yields comparable to that of N-terminal phenylalanine (Fig. 
S4 and Fig. S5).  
 
Fig. 3. DNA-encoded Edman degradation on magnetic beads. (A) Reaction scheme for barcoding PTC amino acids 
via DNA-encoded Edman degradation on magnetic beads. Anchor DNA (ODN-3) is immobilized on carboxylic acid 
beads via carbodiimide coupling and then ligated to DBCO-modified 5′-phosphorylated DNA (ODN-4) (step 1). The 
azidolysine-modified peptide FGGGGGX is attached to ODN-4 via click reaction (step 2), after which the peptide’s N-
terminus is reacted with azide-modified PITC (1) (step 3). The DBCO-modified primer (ODN-5) is then coupled via 
proximity SPAAC reaction (step 4). Next, primer extension generates a complementary sequence to the peptide 
barcode DNA (step 5). Cleavage by BF3·Et2O-mediated Edman degradation yields a DNA-barcoded ATZ amino acid, 
which remains hybridized on the bead due to the insolubility of DNA in acetonitrile (step 6). Finally, hydrolysis under 
reducing basic conditions converts the ATZ amino acid to a PTC amino acid and denatures the DNA duplex, releasing 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 8 ---
 
8 
 
the DNA-barcoded PTC amino acid from the solid support (step 7). The DNA used in this experiment contains non-
nucleotide modifications: hexaethylene glycol (2), hexylamine (3), DBCO (4), biotin-dT (5). The structures of the 
modifications are shown in Table S2. (B) Denaturing PAGE analysis of DNA-encoded Edman degradation. We used a 
disulfide-modified anchor DNA (ODN-S10) that enables the release of intermediates from magnetic beads by reduction. 
We analyzed aliquots taken after anchor DNA immobilization (lane 1), DNA ligation (lane 2), conjugation of peptide 
(lane 3), conjugation of azide-modified PITC (lane 4), and conjugation of DBCO-modified primer (ODN-5, lane 5). In 
lane 6, we used a DBCO-modified poly-dT sequence (ODN-S12) to carry out the click reaction as a negative control, 
and no click product was observed after 10 min. (C) MS spectrum of DNA-barcoded PTC-F generated by the first cycle 
of DNA-encoded Edman degradation on peptide FGGGGGX (calculated molecular weight 18,824.2, observed 
molecular weight 18,824.0). Peaks at 13,436.1, 16,254.6, 18,191.9, and 18,519.9 correspond to truncated products 
resulting from incomplete primer extension. The peak at 19,136.0 corresponds to the product from A-tailing. The inset 
shows HPLC chromatograms of DNA-barcoded PTC-F. (D) Efficiency of DNA-encoded Edman degradation over five 
cycles as measured by flow cytometry. Stepwise yields are 96.9 ± 0.1%, 95.8 ± 0.1%, 94.75 ± 0.08%, 93.94 ± 0.05%, 
92.1 ± 0.1%.  
Finally, we confirmed that we could perform this process over multiple rounds by carrying out 
five iterative cycles of cleavage with FGGGGGX. The degradation products from each round were 
isolated, and their structures were confirmed by LC-MS (Fig. S6). The degradation yield for each 
cycle was determined by flow cytometry as described above (Fig. 3D). We observed a slight 
decrease in available peptides after each cycle, as indicated by a reduction of fluorescence signal 
before degradation (Fig. S6). It is unlikely that this is due to the instability of the DBCO-azide 
linkage since no decomposition of this linkage was observed by MS (Fig. 3C). We hypothesize 
that the decrease in available peptides is caused by processes that irreversibly block the N-
terminus, such as oxidative desulfurization of the PTC moiety.(45, 49) 
Conversion of barcoded PTC amino acids to DNA reporters 
The DNA-barcoded PTC amino acids are subsequently converted into DNA reporters by an 
antibody binding-mediated PEA. For PTC amino acids with no existing antibody, we generated 
novel monoclonal antibodies by immunizing mice with bovine serum albumin (BSA) conjugated 
to various PTC amino acids (Fig. S7). This process yielded antibodies that achieved good 
specificity and affinity for PTC-modified phenylalanine (PTC-F, Fig. 4A), tryptophan (PTC-W, 
Fig. 4B), aspartic acid (PTC-D, Fig. 4C), and arginine (PTC-R, Fig. 4D), as measured by biolayer 
interferometry (BLI, Fig. S8). An anti-PTC tyrosine (PTC-Y, Fig. 4E) antibody was also obtained 
with only modest specificity against PTC-F, but high specificity against other non-target PTC 
amino acids. For some PTC amino acids, their side chains remain intact and unobstructed, such 
that existing antibodies targeting these side chains—including antibodies against PTMs—may 
maintain their affinity. We experimentally confirmed that commercially available antibodies 
against phosphotyrosine (pY), asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), phosphoserine (pS), and 
acetylated lysine (AcK) all retained their high affinity for corresponding PTC amino acids (Fig. 4F 
and Fig. S9). 
We functionalized the Fc domain of anti-PTC amino acid antibodies with tetrazine (Tz) using 
photoreactive antibody-binding domains (Fig. S10, A and B). The functionalized antibodies were 
coupled via click chemistry to trans-cyclooctene (TCO)-modified DNA sequences consisting of 
the PCR reverse primer (RP) and the PEA primer (e.g., ODN-7, Fig. 4G and Fig. S10C). 
Independently synthesized PTC amino acids were conjugated with a model barcode DNA (ODN-
6) containing the PCR forward primer (FP) and the PEA primer binding site via SPAAC and pulled 
down on SA beads (Fig. 4G). The immobilized DNA-barcoded PTC amino acids were recognized 
by their corresponding primer-functionalized antibodies, and this binding event stabilized the 
primer-template complex and enabled primer extension. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 9 ---
 
9 
 
 
Fig. 4. PEA-mediated conversion of DNA-barcoded PTC amino acids into DNA reporters. (A to F) Binding curves 
of (A) anti-PTC-F, (B) anti-PTC-W, (C) anti-PTC-Y, (D) anti-PTC-D, (E) anti-PTC-R, and (F) PY20 antibody against 
target and non-target DNA-tagged PTC-amino acids (PTC-E = PTC glutamic acid, PTC-N = PTC asparagine, PTC-Q 
= PTC glutamine), as measured by biolayer interferometry (BLI). Calculated Kd values for the primary antibody target 
are shown in each plot. (G) Scheme for converting DNA-barcoded PTC amino acids to DNA reporters. First, anti-PTC-
F antibody is modified with photoreactive antibody-binding domains (i.e., oYo link) to introduce a tetrazine (Tz) 
functional group onto the Fc region. Next, a TCO-modified DNA strand featuring a PEA primer sequence of 5–7 nt 
(ODN-7, -8, or -9) is conjugated with the Tz group to form a primer-antibody conjugate. PTC-F is tagged with biotinylated 
template DNA (ODN-6) and immobilized onto SA beads. The beads are incubated with primer-modified anti-PTC-F 
antibody, and then Klenow fragment (exo-) is added to perform PEA. The resulting product is PCR amplified for further 
analysis. ODN-7, -8, or -9 contain TCO modification (6). The structure is shown in Table S2. (H) Native PAGE of 
products generated by PEA with primers of varying lengths. 5 nt and 6 nt PEA primers (ODN-7 and ODN-8) can 
specifically distinguish antibody-antigen interactions, whereas the longer 7 nt primer (ODN-9) produces a non-specific 
signal. (I) Quantification of DNA output of PEA by qPCR. PEA was carried out with 30 nM ODN-8-tagged anti-PTC-F 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 10 ---
 
10 
 
antibody and ODN-6-PTC-F immobilized on SA beads. For the positive control, the primer extension was performed 
using a 12 nt primer (ODN-10, 30 nM) and ODN-6 immobilized on SA beads without PTC-F conjugation. A non-specific 
PEA was performed as a negative control with similarly ODN-6-modified SA beads and 30 nM ODN-8-tagged anti-
PTC-F antibody. (J) PEA efficiency of other anti-PTC amino acid antibodies. All antibodies were modified with ODN-8, 
and PEA was carried out with 100 nM primer-antibody conjugate. (K) Detection of a dilution series of ODN-6-PTC-F 
immobilized on SA beads by PEA in 20 µL reactions. PEA input copy number is calculated based on the amount of 
ODN-6-PTC-F added to the SA pulldown. PEA output copy number is calculated based on the qPCR standard curve. 
The data is fitted using linear regression with equation y = 1.003x - 0.0008015 and R2 = 0.999. 
 
In traditional PEA, a quantitative DNA output is not required for the quantification of the 
molecule of interest.(50) However, PEA efficiency is critical for our method to achieve high 
sequencing coverage and single-molecule sensitivity. Specificity is also essential for achieving 
high-fidelity reads. There are two competing reactions during proximity extension: specific primer 
extension that only occurs with help from antibody-antigen binding, and non-specific primer 
extension initiated in the absence of antibody-antigen recognition. The efficiency of specific 
primer extension is affected by both the affinity of the antibodies and the stability of the primer-
template complex, while the extent of non-specific primer extension is only affected by the latter. 
Thus, tuning primer-template complex stability could increase the yield of specific primer 
extension and suppress the non-specific one. To test this, we assessed the specificity and efficiency 
of proximity extension when barcoded PTC-F, -W, or -Y were incubated with anti-PTC-F 
antibodies modified with PEA primer sequences ranging in length from 5–7 nt (ODN-7, -8, or -9, 
respectively). Considerable non-specific primer extension was observed with ODN-9, whereas the 
shorter primers favored specific primer extension (Fig. 4H). Next, we evaluated the efficiency of 
proximity extension by qPCR. At a concentration of 100 nM, anti-PTC-F antibody modified with 
ODN-7 only converted 24% of PTC-F molecules to a DNA output (Fig. S11D). On the other hand, 
ODN-8-modified anti-PTC-F yielded complete primer extension at the same concentration (Fig. 
S11F). In addition to primer length, the stability of primer-template complexes is also affected by 
the primer concentration. Because non-specific primer extension solely originates from primer-
template hybridization, it can be greatly inhibited by reducing the primer concentration. With 30 
nM ODN-8-conjugated anti-PTC-F, the extent of non-specific primer extension was just 1% of 
that of specific primer extension, and the reduced concentration had minimal impact on the yield 
of specific primer extension (Fig. 4I). In contrast, increasing the antibody concentration to 300 nM 
only increased the extent of non-specific primer extension (Fig. S11F). PEA efficiencies were 
determined for other antibodies conjugated with ODN-8. Specific primer extension reactions were 
observed for all antibodies, with a positive correlation between the yield of the proximity extension 
reaction and the affinity of the antibody (Fig. 4J). Lastly, for a certain pair of primer-modified 
antibody and PTC amino acid, the efficiency of proximity extension is determined by the antibody 
concentration (see Supplementary Text). Therefore, reducing the amount of input PTC amino acids 
should not affect PEA performance. We tested this hypothesis with PTC-F/anti-PTC-F and 
observed that the efficiency of proximity extension remained quantitative for input quantities as 
low as 10 amol ODN-6-PTC-F in a 20 µL reaction (Fig. 4K, Fig. S11, H and I).  
Sequencing of model peptides 
Having optimized the various steps of our protocol, we carried out proof-of-concept 
sequencing on a model peptide (Fig. 5A). We prepared carboxylic acid beads as described above, 
ligating the bead-immobilized anchor DNA (ODN-11) with a peptide-barcoding strand featuring 
a 2 nt peptide barcode (ODN-12). We then immobilized the 7 aa peptide RGFDWGX, which 
consists of four amino acids that can be detected by previously mentioned anti-PTC amino acid 
antibodies (anti-PTC-R, -F, -D, and -W). The glycine residue serves as an exemplar of an amino 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 11 ---
 
11 
 
acid that cannot be detected currently, which allows us to assess the true background in the absence 
of a specific antibody recognition event during the sequencing process. We performed five cycles 
of sequencing on ~100 pmol peptide. To introduce cycle number-specific barcodes during the 
adaptor PCR step, the PTC amino acids from each cycle were collected and processed separately. 
The DNA-barcoded PTC amino acids were enriched by SA bead pulldown, yielding a final loading 
density of ~10 pmol biotinylated DNA-barcoded PTC amino acids per mg of beads. Then PEA 
was carried out with a mixture of DNA-modified anti-PTC-R, -F, -D, and -W antibodies, where 
each DNA strand comprised the RP sequence for PCR amplification, a 3 nt antibody barcode, and 
a 6 nt PEA primer sequence (ODN-13, ODN-S23 to S25, Table S1). After PEA, sequencing 
adaptors were incorporated via PCR, during which 2 nt cycle number barcodes were introduced 
with forward adaptor primers (ODN-14, ODN-S26 to S29, Table S1). The PCR products were 
then combined for indexing and sequencing. After sequencing, barcodes encoding cycle number 
and antibody identity were extracted and counted, and the raw counts of reads bearing the same 
antibody barcode were normalized by setting the highest read count to 100 (Fig. 5B). Overall, the 
correct amino acid assignment for each position consistently produced the highest normalized read 
count, producing signals that were 20–100 times above the background. While sequencing the 
undetectable glycine in the second cycle, we observed a normalized read count comparable to that 
of background in other cycles. This demonstrates that undetectable amino acids at a given position 
can be clearly identified rather than being incorrectly assigned. The raw read counts were generally 
consistent with degradation yield and proximity extension efficiencies established previously (Fig. 
S12A).  
Our procedure is also capable of sensitively discriminating subtle sequence differences in 
mixtures of peptides. One major challenge in processing multiple peptide species is the possibility 
of barcode crosstalk during PEA (Fig. 5C), where antibody binding to one PTC amino acid may 
initiate primer extension on another nearby template. We could address this by reducing the 
loading density of DNA-barcoded PTC amino acid on the beads—at lower loading densities, the 
effective template concentration for on-target proximity extension is unaffected. In contrast, the 
effective template concentration for off-target proximity extension is reduced, yielding a 
substantially smaller off-target DNA reporter readout. We performed preliminary screening of 
loading density and determined that the extent of off-target proximity extension was reduced to 
3% of that of on-target proximity extension at 0.5 pmol/mg loading (Fig. S13, A and B).  
Having demonstrated the feasibility of minimizing barcode crosstalk between sequencing 
readouts for different peptides, we set out to distinguish two peptides that differ by a single amino 
acid (AFGGGX and AWGGGX) by sequencing the first three amino acids in parallel. To sequence 
these two peptides simultaneously, we slightly modified the initial stages of our method; each of 
the two peptides was first conjugated with a unique peptide barcode, after which these DNA-
barcoded peptides were mixed in an equimolar ratio and immobilized onto anchor strand-modified 
magnetic beads by ligation. Subsequent degradation and sample processing steps were performed 
similarly to the single-peptide sequencing process described above. The DNA-barcoded PTC 
amino acids were detected with an equimolar mixture of primer-conjugated anti-PTC-F and -W 
antibodies (30 nM each). The resulting primer extension products were then barcoded with cycle 
number barcodes and sequenced. After separating our analyses based on the peptide-identifying 
barcodes, we confirmed that the normalized read counts accurately reflected each peptide 
sequence, such that the two could be clearly distinguished (Fig. 5, D and E).  
Finally, we sequenced three peptides with different phosphorylation patterns in parallel: 
pYGYGGX, YGpYGGX, and pYGpYGGX. Existing methods like enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 12 ---
 
12 
 
assay (ELISA) and MS often struggle to identify the correct position of a PTM given multiple 
candidate sites. Because our method allows sequential analysis of individual amino acids, 
phosphorylation sites could be accurately assigned when sequenced with anti-pY (PY20, 30 nM, 
Fig. 5, F to H). We also sequenced the mixture with anti-PTC-Y antibody (100 nM) separately, 
which is less efficient during PEA due to its low affinity (Fig. 4J) but demonstrates specificity for 
PTC-Y over PTC-pY (Fig. 4E). Although the readouts here were also consistently accurate, the 
signal-to-noise ratio was much lower than that of PY20, in concordance with the proximity 
extension efficiency of anti-PTC-Y antibody. Collectively, these results highlight our platform’s 
capacity to accurately discriminate both native and post-translationally modified versions of the 
same amino acid within a peptide sequence. 
 
Fig. 5. Demonstrations of peptide sequencing. (A) Overview of the complete peptide “reverse translation” process. 
A DNA strand bearing the FP and 2 nt peptide barcode (ODN-12) is ligated onto anchor DNA (ODN-11)-modified 
carboxylic acid beads, forming the complete peptide barcode DNA. The model peptide RGFDWGX is then linked to the 
DNA strand via SPAAC and subjected to our modified Edman degradation process, which yields a DNA-barcoded PTC 
amino acid. This is recognized by an antibody barcoded with a DNA consisting of the RP sequence, a 3 nt antibody 
barcode, and a 6 nt PEA primer (e.g., ODN-13 for PTC-R). The resulting PEA product is amplified by adaptor PCR, 
during which a 2 nt cycle number barcode is introduced through barcoded forward adaptor primers (e.g., ODN-14 for 
cycle 1). The final DNA reporter sequence contains barcodes for peptide, antibody (i.e., amino acid identity), and cycle 
number (i.e., amino acid position). (B) Heatmap of normalized barcode read counts from the first five residues of 
RGFDWGX. The raw counts of reads bearing the same antibody barcode were normalized by setting the highest read 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 13 ---
 
13 
 
count to 100. The correct residue at each position is shown at the top. (C) Scheme of on-target and off-target proximity 
extension, the latter of which leads to barcode crosstalk. (D and E) Heatmaps of normalized read counts for peptide 
sequences (D) AFG and (E) AWG after sequencing an equimolar mixture of the two peptides. (F to H) Heatmaps of 
normalized read counts for peptide sequences (D) pYGY, (G) YGpY, and (H) pYGpY after analysis with PY20 and anti-
PTC-Y antibodies. Normalization for (D to E) was applied as in (B). 
 
Conclusions  
Our "reverse translation" strategy for peptide sequencing offers numerous advantages relative 
to other methods described to date. The Edman degradation-based method employed here excises 
one amino acid at a time, enabling each to be analyzed independently outside the larger context of 
the peptide. This enables peptide sequencing at single-amino acid resolution and eliminates the 
potential for interference from adjacent amino acids or PTMs. The released amino acids are 
subsequently detected by antibodies, which can, in principle, be directly generated against the full 
spectrum of proteinogenic amino acids. In this work, we have demonstrated such capabilities with 
four antibodies that exhibit good affinity and specificity for their natural amino acid targets. 
Furthermore, we demonstrated that we can leverage PTM-specific antibodies to accurately identify 
the presence and position of such modifications. Our method converts peptide sequence 
information into DNA strands. These DNA strands can be amplified by PCR, enabling detection 
with single-molecule sensitivity.(51, 52) Thus, the sensitivity of our method ultimately depends 
on the efficiency of PEA. Using the best-performing antibodies, we have demonstrated that PEA 
can quantitatively convert 10 amol of PTC amino acids to DNA reporters in a 20 µL reaction 
containing approximately 1,000 beads (Fig. 4K). Since the efficiency of PEA is determined by the 
antibody concentration, in theory, the sensitivity of our assay can be further enhanced by dividing 
the bulk assay into droplet-based single-bead assays, which has been shown to enable the detection 
of targets with single-molecule sensitivity.(53–55) Additionally, by incorporating unique 
molecular identifiers, our method should be applicable to the sequencing of complex peptide 
mixtures as well as the digital quantification of peptides.(56) Finally, this approach employs 
conventional reagents (e.g., antibodies and oligonucleotides) and does not require specialized 
instrumentation. The DNA that encodes peptide sequences is analyzed using high-throughput 
sequencing platforms, the current generation of which can generate tens of billions of reads per 
run, making this strategy cost-effective and highly scalable.  
However, several challenges remain in realizing the sequencing of native peptides with single-
molecule sensitivity. First, our method requires the conjugation of DNA to the C-terminus of 
peptides, which we achieved in this work by modifying the C-termini of our peptides with 
azidolysine residues. While several strategies for C-terminus-specific labeling have been 
reported,(57–60) they are limited in their substrate scope, and a generalizable C-terminus-specific 
modification reaction is currently unavailable. Alternatively, cysteine can serve as a handle for 
conjugation, but this approach restricts the scope of peptides that can be sequenced.(61) 
Additionally, further improvements in the efficiency of DNA-encoded Edman degradation and 
degradation fragment recovery are needed to accommodate longer sequencing reads. Although we 
have not observed loss of synchrony due to incomplete cleavage during the sequencing of short 
model peptides, this potential issue could be addressed by implementing cycle number barcodes 
during Edman degradation. Finally, the scope, sensitivity, and accuracy of our sequencing method 
are determined by the performance of our PTC amino acid-specific antibodies. Some applications 
may not require the identification of all amino acids, and indeed, there are already commercially 
available instruments that focus on peptide identification based on limited sequence profiling. 
However, the de novo sequencing of proteins with single-molecule sensitivity will require a 
complete set of amino acid-specific antibodies. We have demonstrated a complete pipeline for 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 14 ---
 
14 
 
antibody generation via immunization. However, generating antibodies with high affinity and 
sufficient specificity to discriminate structurally similar amino acids via this process may be 
challenging. Further improvement of antibody affinity can be achieved via directed evolution,(62) 
and specificity could also be reprogrammed from existing cross-reactive binders.(63) 
Alternatively, new binders could be generated using emerging computational design methods.(64, 
65)  
In summary, our work lays the groundwork for sequencing peptides by converting their 
sequence to DNA. With the expansion of the antibody arsenal and further refinement and 
streamlining of our chemical process, we believe that our method will be capable of high-
throughput de novo protein sequencing of both unmodified and PTM-bearing proteins with single-
amino acid resolution and single-molecule sensitivity, opening up exciting new opportunities for 
single-molecule proteomic analysis. 
 
References and Notes 
1.  
A. A. Pollen, T. J. Nowakowski, J. Shuga, X. Wang, A. A. Leyrat, J. H. Lui, N. Li, L. Szpankowski, B. Fowler, 
P. Chen, N. Ramalingam, G. Sun, M. Thu, M. Norris, R. Lebofsky, D. Toppani, D. W. Kemp, M. Wong, B. 
Clerkson, B. N. Jones, S. Wu, L. Knutsson, B. Alvarado, J. Wang, L. S. Weaver, A. P. May, R. C. Jones, M. A. 
Unger, A. R. Kriegstein, J. A. A. West, Low-coverage single-cell mRNA sequencing reveals cellular 
heterogeneity and activated signaling pathways in developing cerebral cortex. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 1053–1058 
(2014). 
2.  
N. Wang, J. Zheng, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, B. Dura, M. Kwak, J. Xavier-Ferrucio, Y.-C. Lu, M. Zhang, C. Roden, J. 
Cheng, D. S. Krause, Y. Ding, R. Fan, J. Lu, Single-cell microRNA-mRNA co-sequencing reveals non-genetic 
heterogeneity and mechanisms of microRNA regulation. Nat. Commun. 10, 95 (2019). 
3.  
A. A. Kolodziejczyk, J. K. Kim, V. Svensson, J. C. Marioni, S. A. Teichmann, The technology and biology of 
single-cell RNA sequencing. Mol. Cell 58, 610–620 (2015). 
4.  
S. Sonneveld, B. M. P. Verhagen, M. E. Tanenbaum, Heterogeneity in mRNA Translation. Trends Cell Biol. 
30, 606–618 (2020). 
5.  
L. M. Smith, J. N. Agar, J. Chamot-Rooke, P. O. Danis, Y. Ge, J. A. Loo, L. Paša-Tolić, Y. O. Tsybin, N. L. 
Kelleher, Consortium for Top-Down Proteomics, The Human Proteoform Project: Defining the human 
proteome. Sci. Adv. 7, eabk0734 (2021). 
6.  
M. Tajik, M. Baharfar, W. A. Donald, Single-cell mass spectrometry. Trends Biotechnol. 40, 1374–1392 (2022). 
7.  
Z. Ye, P. Sabatier, J. Martin-Gonzalez, A. Eguchi, M. Lechner, O. Østergaard, J. Xie, Y. Guo, L. Schultz, R. 
Truffer, D. B. Bekker-Jensen, N. Bache, J. V. Olsen, One-Tip enables comprehensive proteome coverage in 
minimal cells and single zygotes. Nat. Commun. 15, 2474 (2024). 
8.  
U. H. Guzman, A. Martinez-Val, Z. Ye, E. Damoc, T. N. Arrey, A. Pashkova, S. Renuse, E. Denisov, J. Petzoldt, 
A. C. Peterson, F. Harking, O. Østergaard, R. Rydbirk, S. Aznar, H. Stewart, Y. Xuan, D. Hermanson, S. 
Horning, C. Hock, A. Makarov, V. Zabrouskov, J. V. Olsen, Ultra-fast label-free quantification and 
comprehensive proteome coverage with narrow-window data-independent acquisition. Nat. Biotechnol., 1–12 
(2024). 
9.  
R. G. Huffman, A. Leduc, C. Wichmann, M. Di Gioia, F. Borriello, H. Specht, J. Derks, S. Khan, L. Khoury, 
E. Emmott, A. A. Petelski, D. H. Perlman, J. Cox, I. Zanoni, N. Slavov, Prioritized mass spectrometry increases 
the depth, sensitivity and data completeness of single-cell proteomics. Nat. Methods 20, 714–722 (2023). 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 15 ---
 
15 
 
10.  M. J. MacCoss, J. A. Alfaro, D. A. Faivre, C. C. Wu, M. Wanunu, N. Slavov, Sampling the proteome by 
emerging single-molecule and mass spectrometry methods. Nat. Methods 20, 339–346 (2023). 
11.  J. A. Alfaro, P. Bohländer, M. Dai, M. Filius, C. J. Howard, X. F. van Kooten, S. Ohayon, A. Pomorski, S. 
Schmid, A. Aksimentiev, E. V. Anslyn, G. Bedran, C. Cao, M. Chinappi, E. Coyaud, C. Dekker, G. Dittmar, N. 
Drachman, R. Eelkema, D. Goodlett, S. Hentz, U. Kalathiya, N. L. Kelleher, R. T. Kelly, Z. Kelman, S. H. Kim, 
B. Kuster, D. Rodriguez-Larrea, S. Lindsay, G. Maglia, E. M. Marcotte, J. P. Marino, C. Masselon, M. Mayer, 
P. Samaras, K. Sarthak, L. Sepiashvili, D. Stein, M. Wanunu, M. Wilhelm, P. Yin, A. Meller, C. Joo, The 
emerging landscape of single-molecule protein sequencing technologies. Nat. Methods 18, 604–617 (2021). 
12.  L. Restrepo-Pérez, C. Joo, C. Dekker, Paving the way to single-molecule protein sequencing. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
13, 786–796 (2018). 
13.  B. D. Reed, M. J. Meyer, V. Abramzon, O. Ad, O. Ad, P. Adcock, F. R. Ahmad, G. Alppay, J. A. Ball, J. Beach, 
D. Belhachemi, A. Bellofiore, M. Bellos, J. F. Beltrán, A. Betts, M. W. Bhuiya, K. Blacklock, R. Boer, D. 
Boisvert, N. D. Brault, A. Buxbaum, S. Caprio, C. Choi, T. D. Christian, R. Clancy, J. Clark, T. Connolly, K. 
F. Croce, R. Cullen, M. Davey, J. Davidson, M. M. Elshenawy, M. Ferrigno, D. Frier, S. Gudipati, S. Hamill, 
Z. He, S. Hosali, H. Huang, L. Huang, A. Kabiri, G. Kriger, B. Lathrop, A. Li, P. Lim, S. Liu, F. Luo, C. Lv, 
X. Ma, E. McCormack, M. Millham, R. Nani, M. Pandey, J. Parillo, G. Patel, D. H. Pike, K. Preston, A. Pichard-
Kostuch, K. Rearick, T. Rearick, M. Ribezzi-Crivellari, G. Schmid, J. Schultz, X. Shi, B. Singh, N. Srivastava, 
S. F. Stewman, T. Thurston, T. R. Thurston, P. Trioli, J. Tullman, X. Wang, Y.-C. Wang, E. A. G. Webster, Z. 
Zhang, J. Zuniga, S. S. Patel, A. D. Griffiths, A. M. van Oijen, M. McKenna, M. D. Dyer, J. M. Rothberg, Real-
time dynamic single-molecule protein sequencing on an integrated semiconductor device. Science 378, 186–
192 (2022). 
14.  P. Martin-Baniandres, W.-H. Lan, S. Board, M. Romero-Ruiz, S. Garcia-Manyes, Y. Qing, H. Bayley, Enzyme-
less nanopore detection of post-translational modifications within long polypeptides. Nat. Nanotechnol. 18, 
1335–1340 (2023). 
15.  L. Yu, X. Kang, F. Li, B. Mehrafrooz, A. Makhamreh, A. Fallahi, J. C. Foster, A. Aksimentiev, M. Chen, M. 
Wanunu, Unidirectional single-file transport of full-length proteins through a nanopore. Nat. Biotechnol. 41, 
1130–1139 (2023). 
16.  H. Brinkerhoff, A. S. W. Kang, J. Liu, A. Aksimentiev, C. Dekker, Multiple rereads of single proteins at single–
amino acid resolution using nanopores. Science 374, 1509–1513 (2021). 
17.  I. C. Nova, J. Ritmejeris, H. Brinkerhoff, T. J. R. Koenig, J. H. Gundlach, C. Dekker, Detection of 
phosphorylation post-translational modifications along single peptides with nanopores. Nat. Biotechnol., 1–5 
(2023). 
18.  K. Motone, D. Kontogiorgos-Heintz, J. Wee, K. Kurihara, S. Yang, G. Roote, Y. Fang, N. Cardozo, J. Nivala, 
Multi-pass, single-molecule nanopore reading of long protein strands with single-amino acid sensitivity. 
bioRxiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.19.563182. 
19.  K. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Zhou, X. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wang, P. Fan, Y. Xiao, W. Sun, P. Zhang, W. Li, S. Huang, 
Unambiguous discrimination of all 20 proteinogenic amino acids and their modifications by nanopore. Nat. 
Methods 21, 92–101 (2024). 
20.  Y. Zhang, Y. Yi, Z. Li, K. Zhou, L. Liu, H.-C. Wu, Peptide sequencing based on host–guest interaction-assisted 
nanopore sensing. Nat. Methods 21, 102–109 (2024). 
21.  J. Swaminathan, A. A. Boulgakov, E. T. Hernandez, A. M. Bardo, J. L. Bachman, J. Marotta, A. M. Johnson, 
E. V. Anslyn, E. M. Marcotte, Highly parallel single-molecule identification of proteins in zeptomole-scale 
mixtures. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 1076–1082 (2018). 
22.  O. Boutureira, G. J. L. Bernardes, Advances in chemical protein modification. Chem. Rev. 115, 2174–2195 
(2015). 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 16 ---
 
16 
 
23.  P. A. Szijj, K. A. Kostadinova, R. J. Spears, V. Chudasama, Tyrosine bioconjugation – an emergent alternative. 
Org. Biomol. Chem. 18, 9018–9028 (2020). 
24.  W. S. Choi, B.-C. Jeong, Y. J. Joo, M.-R. Lee, J. Kim, M. J. Eck, H. K. Song, Structural basis for the recognition 
of N-end rule substrates by the UBR box of ubiquitin ligases. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17, 1175–1181 (2010). 
25.  B. J. Stein, R. A. Grant, R. T. Sauer, T. A. Baker, Structural basis of an N-degron adaptor with more stringent 
specificity. Structure 24, 232–242 (2016). 
26.  P. Edman, E. Högfeldt, L. G. Sillén, P.-O. Kinell, Method for determination of the amino acid sequence in 
peptides. Acta Chem. Scand. 4, 283–293 (1950). 
27.  L. M. McGregor, D. J. Gorin, C. E. Dumelin, D. R. Liu, Interaction-dependent PCR: Identification of 
ligand−target pairs from libraries of ligands and libraries of targets in a single solution-phase experiment. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 132, 15522–15524 (2010). 
28.  P. Zhang, J. Hu, J. S. Park, K. Hsieh, L. Chen, A. Mao, T.-H. Wang, Highly sensitive serum protein analysis 
using magnetic bead-based proximity extension assay. Anal. Chem. 94, 12481–12489 (2022). 
29.  J. A. Zoltewicz, D. F. Clark, T. W. Sharpless, G. Grahe, Kinetics and mechanism of the acid-catalyzed 
hydrolysis of some purine nucleosides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 92, 1741–1750 (1970). 
30.  J. M. Hong, M. Gibbons, A. Bashir, D. Wu, S. Shao, Z. Cutts, M. Chavarha, Y. Chen, L. Schiff, M. Foster, V. 
A. Church, L. Ching, S. Ahadi, A. Hieu-Thao Le, A. Tran, M. Dimon, M. Coram, B. Williams, P. Jess, M. 
Berndl, A. Pawlosky, ProtSeq: Toward high-throughput, single-molecule protein sequencing via amino acid 
conversion into DNA barcodes. iScience 25, 103586 (2022). 
31.  T. Iida, T. Santa, A. Toriba, K. Imai, Semi-automatic amino acid sequencing and D/L-configuration 
determination of peptides with detection of liberated N-terminal phenylthiocarbamoylamino acids. Analyst 123, 
2829–2834 (1998). 
32.  H. Matsunaga, T. Santa, T. Iida, T. Fukushima, H. Homma, K. Imai, Proton:  A major factor for the racemization 
and the dehydration at the cyclization/cleavage stage in the Edman sequencing method. Anal. Chem. 68, 2850–
2856 (1996). 
33.  M. J. Mitchell, W. Hirschowitz, F. Rastinejad, P. Lu, Boron trifluoride-methanol complex as a non-depurinating 
detritylating agent in DNA synthesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 18, 5321 (1990). 
34.  T. Haldar, J. S. Jha, Z. Yang, C. Nel, K. Housh, O. J. Cassidy, K. S. Gates, Unexpected complexity in the 
products arising from NaOH-, heat-, amine-, and glycosylase-induced strand cleavage at an abasic site in DNA. 
Chem. Res. Toxicol. 35, 218–232 (2022). 
35.  F. Seela, S. Menkhoff, S. Behrendt, Furanoside–pyranoside isomerization of tubercidin and its 2′-deoxy 
derivatives: influence of nucleobase and sugar structure on the proton-catalysed reaction. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin 
Trans. 2, 525–530 (1986). 
36.  M. Potowski, V. B. K. Kunig, L. Eberlein, A. Vakalopoulos, S. M. Kast, A. Brunschweiger, Chemically 
stabilized DNA barcodes for DNA-encoded chemistry. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 19744–19749 (2021). 
37.  V. Farnsworth, K. Steinberg, The generation of phenylthiocarbamyl or anilinothiazolinone amino acids from 
the postcleavage products of the edman degradation. Anal. Biochem. 215, 200–210 (1993). 
38.  P. Matsudaira, “Introduction” in A Practical Guide to Protein and Peptide Purification for Microsequencing 
(Second Edition), P. Matsudaira, Ed. (Academic Press, San Diego, 1993), pp. 1–13. 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 17 ---
 
17 
 
39.  P. Rydberg, B. Lüning, C. A. Wachtmeister, L. Eriksson, M. Törnqvist, Applicability of a modified Edman 
procedure for measurement of protein adducts:  Mechanisms of formation and degradation of 
phenylthiohydantoins. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 15, 570–581 (2002). 
40.  D. T. Flood, S. Asai, X. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Yoon, Z. C. Adams, B. C. Dillingham, B. B. Sanchez, J. C. 
Vantourout, M. E. Flanagan, D. W. Piotrowski, P. Richardson, S. A. Green, R. A. Shenvi, J. S. Chen, P. S. 
Baran, P. E. Dawson, Expanding reactivity in DNA-encoded library synthesis via reversible binding of DNA to 
an inert quaternary ammonium support. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 9998–10006 (2019). 
41.  A. B. MacConnell, P. J. McEnaney, V. J. Cavett, B. M. Paegel, DNA-encoded solid-phase synthesis: Encoding 
language design and complex oligomer library synthesis. ACS Comb. Sci. 17, 518–534 (2015). 
42.  D. R. Halpin, J. A. Lee, S. J. Wrenn, P. B. Harbury, DNA display III. solid-phase organic synthesis on 
unprotected DNA. PLOS Biol. 2, e175 (2004). 
43.  J. Wang, Q. Gong, N. Maheshwari, M. Eisenstein, M. L. Arcila, K. S. Kosik, H. T. Soh, Particle display: a 
quantitative screening method for generating high-affinity aptamers. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53, 4796–4801 
(2014). 
44.  M. F. Debets, S. S. van Berkel, J. Dommerholt, A. (Ton) J. Dirks, F. P. J. T. Rutjes, F. L. van Delft, 
Bioconjugation with strained alkenes and alkynes. Acc. Chem. Res. 44, 805–815 (2011). 
45.  H. D. Niall, “[36] Automated Edman degradation: The protein sequenator” in Methods in Enzymology 
(Academic Press, 1973), pp. 942–1010. 
46.  V. Hong, S. I. Presolski, C. Ma, M. G. Finn, Analysis and optimization of copper-catalyzed azide–alkyne 
cycloaddition for bioconjugation. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48, 9879–9883 (2009). 
47.  Z. Wang, D. Li, X. Tian, C. Zhang, A copper-free and enzyme-free click chemistry-mediated single quantum 
dot nanosensor for accurate detection of microRNAs in cancer cells and tissues. Chem. Sci. 12, 10426–10435 
(2021). 
48.  S. Nakano, N. Sugimoto, The structural stability and catalytic activity of DNA and RNA oligonucleotides in 
the presence of organic solvents. Biophys. Rev. 8, 11–23 (2016). 
49.  R. A. Laursen, Solid-phase Edman degradation. Eur. J. Biochem. 20, 89–102 (1971). 
50.  S. Fredriksson, M. Gullberg, J. Jarvius, C. Olsson, K. Pietras, S. M. Gústafsdóttir, A. Östman, U. Landegren, 
Protein detection using proximity-dependent DNA ligation assays. Nat. Biotechnol. 20, 473–477 (2002). 
51.  C. Zhang, D. Xing, Single-molecule DNA amplification and analysis using microfluidics. Chem. Rev. 110, 
4910–4947 (2010). 
52.  A. Y. Maslov, S. Makhortov, S. Sun, J. Heid, X. Dong, M. Lee, J. Vijg, Single-molecule, quantitative detection 
of low-abundance somatic mutations by high-throughput sequencing. Sci. Adv. 8, eabm3259 (2022). 
53.  M. Zheng, S. Z. Tian, D. Capurso, M. Kim, R. Maurya, B. Lee, E. Piecuch, L. Gong, J. J. Zhu, Z. Li, C. H. 
Wong, C. Y. Ngan, P. Wang, X. Ruan, C.-L. Wei, Y. Ruan, Multiplex chromatin interactions with single-
molecule precision. Nature 566, 558–562 (2019). 
54.  E. Z. Macosko, A. Basu, R. Satija, J. Nemesh, K. Shekhar, M. Goldman, I. Tirosh, A. R. Bialas, N. Kamitaki, 
E. M. Martersteck, J. J. Trombetta, D. A. Weitz, J. R. Sanes, A. K. Shalek, A. Regev, S. A. McCarroll, Highly 
parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 
(2015). 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 18 ---
 
18 
 
55.  J. Shuga, Y. Zeng, R. Novak, Q. Lan, X. Tang, N. Rothman, R. Vermeulen, L. Li, A. Hubbard, L. Zhang, R. A. 
Mathies, M. T. Smith, Single molecule quantitation and sequencing of rare translocations using microfluidic 
nested digital PCR. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e159 (2013). 
56.  T. Kivioja, A. Vähärautio, K. Karlsson, M. Bonke, M. Enge, S. Linnarsson, J. Taipale, Counting absolute 
numbers of molecules using unique molecular identifiers. Nat. Methods 9, 72–74 (2012). 
57.  S. Bloom, C. Liu, D. K. Kölmel, J. X. Qiao, Y. Zhang, M. A. Poss, W. R. Ewing, D. W. C. MacMillan, 
Decarboxylative alkylation for site-selective bioconjugation of native proteins via oxidation potentials. Nat. 
Chem. 10, 205–211 (2018). 
58.  L. Zhang, B. M. Floyd, M. Chilamari, J. Mapes, J. Swaminathan, S. Bloom, E. M. Marcotte, E. V. Anslyn, 
Photoredox-catalyzed decarboxylative C-terminal differentiation for bulk- and single-molecule proteomics. 
ACS Chem. Biol. 16, 2595–2603 (2021). 
59.  F. B. H. Rehm, T. J. Tyler, K. Yap, S. J. de Veer, D. J. Craik, T. Durek, Enzymatic C-terminal protein 
engineering with amines. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143, 19498–19504 (2021). 
60.  J. M. Antos, G.-L. Chew, C. P. Guimaraes, N. C. Yoder, G. M. Grotenbreg, M. W.-L. Popp, H. L. Ploegh, Site-
specific N- and C-terminal labeling of a single polypeptide using sortases of different specificity. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 131, 10800–10801 (2009). 
61.  J. Swaminathan, A. A. Boulgakov, E. M. Marcotte, A Theoretical justification for single molecule peptide 
sequencing. PLOS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004080 (2015). 
62.  E. T. Boder, K. S. Midelfort, K. D. Wittrup, Directed evolution of antibody fragments with monovalent 
femtomolar antigen-binding affinity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 97, 10701–10705 (2000). 
63.  A. A. Javanpour, C. C. Liu, Evolving small-molecule biosensors with improved performance and reprogrammed 
ligand preference using OrthoRep. ACS Synth. Biol. 10, 2705–2714 (2021). 
64.  L. An, M. Said, L. Tran, S. Majumder, I. Goreshnik, G. R. Lee, D. Juergens, J. Dauparas, I. Anishchenko, B. 
Coventry, A. K. Bera, A. Kang, P. M. Levine, V. Alvarez, A. Pillai, C. Norn, D. Feldman, D. Zorine, D. R. 
Hicks, X. Li, M. G. Sanchez, D. K. Vafeados, P. J. Salveson, A. A. Vorobieva, D. Baker, De novo design of 
diverse small molecule binders and sensors using Shape Complementary Pseudocycles. bioRxiv [Preprint] 
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.12.20.572602. 
65.  G. R. Lee, S. J. Pellock, C. Norn, D. Tischer, J. Dauparas, I. Anischenko, J. A. M. Mercer, A. Kang, A. Bera, 
H. Nguyen, I. Goreshnik, D. Vafeados, N. Roullier, H. L. Han, B. Coventry, H. K. Haddox, D. R. Liu, A. H.-
W. Yeh, D. Baker, Small-molecule binding and sensing with a designed protein family. bioRxiv [Preprint] 
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.11.01.565201. 
66.  T. Scattolin, A. Klein, F. Schoenebeck, Synthesis of isothiocyanates and unsymmetrical thioureas with the 
bench-stable solid reagent (Me4N)SCF3. Org. Lett. 19, 1831–1833 (2017). 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Dr. Adrian Hugenmatter at Stanford Innovative Medicines Accelerator for the helpful 
discussion. We thank Joshua Lowitz at Antibody Solutions for his assistance with custom antibody 
generation. We thank Theresa McLaughlin at Stanford University Mass Spectrometry for her 
assistance with developing LC-MS methods for oligonucleotides. This work was supported by the 
Vincent Coates Foundation Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Stanford University Mass 
Spectrometry (RRID:SCR_017801) utilizing the Bruker Microflex MALDI TOF mass 
spectrometer 
(RRID:SCR_018696) 
and 
Thermo 
Exploris 
240 
LC/MS 
system 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 


--- Page 19 ---
 
19 
 
(RRID:SCR_022216) 
that 
was 
purchased 
with 
funding 
from 
Stanford 
C-ShaRP 
(RRID:SCR_022986). 
Funding 
We are grateful for the financial support from Helmsley Charitable Trust and Wellcome Leap 
SAVE program. 
Author contributions 
Conceptualization: L.Z., H.T.S. 
Methodology: L.Z. 
Investigation: L.Z., Y.S. 
Visualization: L.Z., Y.S. 
Funding acquisition: H.T.S. 
Project administration: H.T.S. 
Writing – original draft: L.Z., H.T.S. 
Writing – review & editing: all authors 
Competing interests L.Z., Y.S., and H.T.S. are listed as coinventors on a pending patent 
application related to this work filed at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (no. 
PCT/US2024/017167). M.E. declares no competing interests. 
Data and materials availability: All data are available in the main text or the supplementary 
materials. Next-generation sequencing data will be made available via figshare upon publication. 
Supplementary Materials 
Materials and Methods 
Supplementary Text 
Figs. S1 to S13 
Tables S1 to S4 
References (66) 
MS Spectra of modified oligonucleotides 
NMR spectra of organic compounds 
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (which
this version posted June 3, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.31.596913
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 
