--- Page 1 ---
PEPTIDE SEQUENCING
Real-time dynamic single-molecule protein
sequencing on an integrated semiconductor device
Brian D. Reed1*, Michael J. Meyer1, Valentin Abramzon1, Omer Ad1, Pat Adcock1, Faisal R. Ahmad1,
Gün Alppay1, James A. Ball1, James Beach1, Dominique Belhachemi1, Anthony Bellofiore1,
Michael Bellos1, Juan Felipe Beltrán1, Andrew Betts1, Mohammad Wadud Bhuiya1,
Kristin Blacklock1, Robert Boer1, David Boisvert1, Norman D. Brault1, Aaron Buxbaum1,
Steve Caprio1, Changhoon Choi1, Thomas D. Christian1, Robert Clancy1, Joseph Clark1,
Thomas Connolly1, Kathren Fink Croce1, Richard Cullen1, Mel Davey1, Jack Davidson1,
Mohamed M. Elshenawy1, Michael Ferrigno1, Daniel Frier1, Saketh Gudipati1, Stephanie Hamill1,
Zhaoyu He1, Sharath Hosali1, Haidong Huang1, Le Huang1, Ali Kabiri1, Gennadiy Kriger1,
Brittany Lathrop1, An Li1, Peter Lim1, Stephen Liu1, Feixiang Luo1, Caixia Lv1, Xiaoxiao Ma1,
Evan McCormack1, Michele Millham1, Roger Nani1, Manjula Pandey1, John Parillo1, Gayatri Patel1,
Douglas H. Pike1, Kyle Preston1, Adeline Pichard-Kostuch2, Kyle Rearick1, Todd Rearick1,
Marco Ribezzi-Crivellari2, Gerard Schmid1, Jonathan Schultz1, Xinghua Shi1, Badri Singh1,
Nikita Srivastava1, Shannon F. Stewman1, T. R. Thurston1, Philip Trioli1, Jennifer Tullman1,
Xin Wang1, Yen-Chih Wang1, Eric A. G. Webster1, Zhizhuo Zhang1, Jorge Zuniga1, Smita S. Patel3,
Andrew D. Griffiths2, Antoine M. van Oijen4, Michael McKenna1,
Matthew D. Dyer1, Jonathan M. Rothberg1
Studies of the proteome would benefit greatly from methods to directly sequence and digitally
quantify proteins and detect posttranslational modifications with single-molecule sensitivity.
Here, we demonstrate single-molecule protein sequencing using a dynamic approach in which single
peptides are probed in real time by a mixture of dye-labeled N-terminal amino acid recognizers
and simultaneously cleaved by aminopeptidases. We annotate amino acids and identify the peptide
sequence by measuring fluorescence intensity, lifetime, and binding kinetics on an integrated
semiconductor chip. Our results demonstrate the kinetic principles that allow recognizers to identify
multiple amino acids in an information-rich manner that enables discrimination of single amino
acid substitutions and posttranslational modifications. With further development, we anticipate
that this approach will offer a sensitive, scalable, and accessible platform for single-molecule
proteomic studies and applications.
M
easurements of the proteome provide
deep and valuable insight into bio-
logical processes. However, methods
with higher sensitivity are needed
to fully understand the complex and
dynamic states of the proteome in cells and
changes to the proteome that occur in disease
states and to make this information more
accessible. The complex nature of the pro-
teome and the chemical properties of proteins
present several fundamental challenges to
achieving sensitivity, throughput, cost, and
adoption on par with DNA sequencing tech-
nologies (1, 2). These challenges include the
large number of different proteins per cell
(>10,000) and yet larger number of proteo-
forms (3); the very wide dynamic range of
protein abundance in cells and biological fluids
(4, 5) and lack of correlation with transcript
levels (6); the costs and high detection limits
of current methods of mass spectrometry (2);
and the inability to copy or amplify proteins.
Methods to directly sequence single protein
molecules offer the maximum possible detec-
tion sensitivity, with the potential to enable
single-cell inputs, digital quantification based
on read counts, detection of posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) and low-abundance or
aberrant proteoforms, and cost and throughput
levels that favor broad adoption.
Here, we present a single-molecule protein
sequencing approach and integrated system
for proteomic studies. We immobilize peptides
in nanoscale reaction chambers on a semi-
conductor chip and detect N-terminal amino
acids (NAAs) with dye-labeled NAA recogniz-
ers in real time. Aminopeptidases sequentially
remove individual NAAs to expose subsequent
amino acids for recognition, eliminating the
need for complex chemistry and fluidics (Fig. 1).
We built a benchtop device with a 532-nm
pulsed laser source for fluorescence excitation
and electronics for signal processing (fig. S1A).
Our semiconductor chip uses fluorescence
intensity and lifetime, rather than emission
wavelength, for discrimination of dye labels.
Our recognizers detect one or more types of
NAAs and provide information for peptide
identification based on the temporal order
of NAA recognition and the kinetics of on-off
binding.
A complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor chip and integrated
system for single-molecule measurements
We used complementary metal-oxide semi-
conductor fabrication technology to build a
custom time domain–sensitive semiconductor
chip with nanosecond precision, containing
fully integrated components for single-molecule
detection, including photosensors, optical wave-
guide circuitry, and reaction chambers for
biomolecule immobilization (fig. S1, B and C).
We achieve observation volumes of <5 attoliters
through evanescent illumination at reaction-
chamber bottoms from the nearby waveguide,
enabling sensitive single-molecule detection
in the context of high concentrations (>1 mM)
of freely diffusing dye.
The semiconductor chip uses a filterless sys-
tem that excludes excitation light on the basis
of photon arrival time, achieving >10,000-
fold attenuation of incident excitation light.
Elimination of an integrated optical filter layer
increases the efficiency of fluorescence collec-
tion and enables scalable manufacturing of the
chip. To discriminate fluorescent dye labels
attached to NAA recognizers by fluorescence
lifetime and intensity, the chip rapidly alter-
nates between early and late signal collection
windows associated with each laser pulse,
thereby collecting different portions of the
exponential fluorescence lifetime decay curve.
The relative signal in these collection windows
(termed “bin ratio”) provides a reliable indica-
tion of fluorescence lifetime (fig. S1, D to H,
and materials and methods).
Ordered recognition and cleavage of NAAs on
single peptide molecules in real time
For NAA binding proteins to function as re-
cognizers, the recognizer-peptide complex must
remain bound long enough (typically >120 ms
on average) to generate detectable single-
molecule binding events. We first focused on
proteins from the N-end rule adapter family
ClpS that naturally bind to N-terminal phenyl-
alanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan (7–9). Using
PS610, a recognizer we derived from ClpS2
from Agrobacterium tumefaciens (table S1),
we established that this recognizer binds detect-
ably to immobilized peptides with these NAAs.
We also determined that the kinetics of bind-
ing differ for each NAA. To demonstrate these
properties, we incubated immobilized peptides
containing the initial N-terminal sequences
FAA, YAA, or WAA (A, alanine; F, phenylala-
nine; W, tryptophan; Y, tyrosine) on separate
chips with PS610 and collected data for 10 hours
(see materials and methods). We observed NAA
recognition by PS610, characterized by contin-
uous on-off binding during the incubation pe-
riod, with a distinct pulse duration (PD) for each
RESEARCH
Reed et al., Science 378, 186–192 (2022)
14 October 2022
1 of 6
1Quantum-Si, Inc., Guilford, CT 06437, USA. 2Laboratoire de
Biochimie, ESPCI Paris, Université PSL, CNRS UMR 8231,
Paris, France. 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
4Molecular Horizons, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
NSW 2522, Australia.
*Corresponding author. Email: breed@quantum-si.com
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on September 07, 2025


--- Page 2 ---
peptide (Fig. 2A). Median PDs were 2.49, 0.73,
and 0.31 s for FAA, YAA, and WAA, respective-
ly. These values reflect differences in binding
affinity driven by different dissociation rates
for each type of protein-NAA interaction (7)
(fig. S2, A and B).
To expand the set of recognizable NAAs, we
further investigated N-end rule pathway pro-
teins as a source of additional recognizers. In a
comprehensive screen of diverse ClpS family
proteins, we discovered a group of ClpS proteins
from the bacterial phylum Planctomycetes with
native binding to N-terminal leucine, isoleucine,
and valine. We applied directed evolution tech-
niques to generate a Planctomycetes ClpS
variant—PS961 (table S1)—with submicromolar
affinity to N-terminal leucine, isoleucine, and
valine, and demonstrated recognition of these
Reed et al., Science 378, 186–192 (2022)
14 October 2022
2 of 6
Recognizers
F Y W
Aminopeptidases
L I V
R
L
F
I
A
R
L
F
I
A
F
I
A
F
A
R
L
I
R
L
I
F
On-off binding
Proteins
Semiconductor chip
Peptides
Reaction
chamber
L
F
I
A
R
Fig. 1. Overview of real-time dynamic protein sequencing. Protein samples
are digested into peptide fragments, immobilized in nanoscale reaction
chambers, and incubated with a mixture of freely diffusing NAA recognizers
and aminopeptidases that carry out the sequencing process. The labeled
recognizers bind on and off to the peptide when one of their cognate NAAs is
exposed at the N terminus, thereby producing characteristic pulsing
patterns. The NAA is cleaved by an aminopeptidase, exposing the next amino
acid for recognition. The temporal order of NAA recognition and the kinetics
of binding enable peptide identification and are sensitive to features that
modulate binding kinetics, such as PTMs.
Fig. 2. NAA recognition and dynamic sequencing. (A to C) Example traces
demonstrating single-molecule N-terminal recognition by PS610 (A), PS961
(B), and PS691 (C). Scatterplots of the number of pulses per RS versus RS
mean PD are displayed for each peptide in (A) to (C), with median PD
indicated. (D) Example traces from dynamic sequencing of the synthetic
peptide FAAWAAYAADDD. Median PD is indicated above each RS.
(E to G) Dynamic sequencing of the synthetic peptide LAQFASIAAYASDDD
using PS610 and PS961. Example traces are shown in (E). A scatterplot
of RS mean PD versus bin ratio illustrating discrimination of recognizers by
bin ratio and NAAs by PD is shown in (F). A scatterplot of the number
of pulses per RS versus RS mean PD, grouped by the amino acid label
assigned to the RS, is shown in (G).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on September 07, 2025


--- Page 3 ---
NAAs (Fig. 2B). The median PD of binding to
peptides with N-terminal LAA, IAA, and VAA
(I, isoleucine; L, leucine; V, valine) was 1.21,
0.28, and 0.21 s, respectively, in agreement
with bulk characterization (fig. S2C).
In a separate screen, we investigated a diverse
set of UBR-box domains from the UBR family of
ubiquitin ligases that natively bind N-terminal
arginine, lysine, and histidine (10). The UBR-
box domain from the yeast Kluyveromyces
marxianus UBR1 protein (table S1) exhibited
the highest affinity for N-terminal arginine, and
we used this protein to generate an arginine
recognizer, PS691. PS691 recognized arginine
in a peptide with N-terminal RLA (R, arginine)
with a median PD of 0.23 s (Fig. 2C). Lower-
affinity binding to N-terminal lysine and
histidine (fig. S2, D and E) was insufficient for
single-molecule detection.
To demonstrate that amino acids in a single
peptide molecule can be sequentially exposed
by aminopeptidases and recognized in real time
with distinguishable kinetics, we incubated
an immobilized peptide containing the initial
sequence FAAWAAYAA with PS610 for 15 min,
followed by the addition of PhTET3, an amino-
peptidase from Pyrococcus horikoshii (11). The
collected traces consisted of regions of distinct
pulsing, which we refer to as recognition seg-
ments (RSs), separated by regions lacking re-
cognition pulsing [nonrecognition segments
(NRSs)]. We developed analysis software to
automatically identify pulsing regions and
transition points within traces on the basis of
fluorescence properties and pulsing kinetics
(see materials and methods). Traces began
with the recognition of phenylalanine with a
median PD of 2.36 s (Fig. 2D), in agreement
with the PD observed for FAA in recognition-
only assays. Thispattern terminated after amino-
peptidase addition (on average, 11 min after
addition) and was followed by the ordered
appearance of two RSs with median PDs of
0.25 and 0.49 s (Fig. 2D), corresponding to
the short and medium PDs obtained in our
YAA and WAA recognition-only assays. Thus,
the introduction of aminopeptidase activity to
the reaction resulted in the sequential appear-
ance of discrete RSs with the expected kinetic
properties in the correct order.
To demonstrate dynamic sequencing with
two NAA recognizers, we labeled PS610 and
PS961 with the distinguishable dyes atto-Rho6G
and Cy3, respectively, and exposed an immobi-
lized peptide of sequence LAQFASIAAYASDDD
(D, aspartate; Q, glutamine; S, serine) to a solu-
tion containing both recognizers. After 15 min,
we added two P. horikoshii aminopeptidases
with combined activity covering all 20 amino
acids—PhTET2 and PhTET3 (11, 12). The col-
lected traces displayed discrete segments of
pulsing alternating between PS961 and PS610
according to the order of recognizable amino
acids in the peptide sequence (Fig. 2E). The
average bin ratio and average PD associated
with each RS readily distinguished the two
dye labels and four types of recognized NAAs
(Fig. 2F). Median PDs were 2.71, 1.40, 0.25, and
0.64 s for N-terminal LAQ, FAS, IAA, and YAS,
respectively (Fig. 2G).
Previous studies have shown that NAA-bound
ClpS and UBR proteins also make contacts with
the residues at position 2 (P2) and position 3
(P3) from the N terminus that influence binding
affinity (9, 13, 14). These influences are reflected
in the modulation of PD depending on the
downstream P2 and P3 residues, as we ob-
served above for LAA (1.21 s) compared with
Reed et al., Science 378, 186–192 (2022)
14 October 2022
3 of 6
Fig. 3. Dynamic sequencing of diverse peptides with high-precision
kinetic outputs. (A to E) Dynamic sequencing of the peptide DQQRLIFAG. An
example trace is shown in (A). A scatterplot of RS mean PD versus bin ratio is
shown in (B). Shown in (C) are additional example traces of dynamic
sequencing of DQQRLIFAG peptide. Shown in (D) are distributions of the
duration of each RS and NRS acquired during sequencing, with mean
durations indicated. Kinetic signature plots summarizing the characteristic
sequencing behavior of DQQRLIFAG peptide are shown in (E). (F to G)
Dynamic sequencing of the synthetic peptides DQQIASSRLAASFAAQQYPDDD
(top), RLAFSALGAADDD (middle), and EFIAWLV (bottom). Example
traces for each peptide are shown in (F). Corresponding kinetic signature
plots are shown in (G).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on September 07, 2025


--- Page 4 ---
LAQ (2.70 s). We find that these influences
on PD vary within informatically advantageous
ranges and can be determined empirically or
approximated in silico to model peptide se-
quencing behavior a priori (fig. S2, F to H). A
powerful feature of this recognition behavior
with respect to peptide identification is that
each RS contains information about potential
downstream P2 and P3 residues or PTMs,
regardless of whether these positions are the
targets of an NAA recognizer.
Principles of dynamic protein sequencing
illustrated with model peptides
To evaluate the kinetic principles of our dy-
namic sequencing method when applied to
diverse sequences, we first characterized the
synthetic peptide DQQRLIFAG (G, glycine),
corresponding to a segment of human ubi-
quitin (Fig. 3, A to E). We performed sequencing
reactions through a combination of three dif-
ferentially labeled recognizers—PS610, PS961,
andPS691—and twoaminopeptidases—PhTET2
and PhTET3 (see materials and methods). The
example trace in Fig. 3A starts with an NRS that
corresponds to the time interval during which
residues in the initial DQQ motif are present at
the N terminus. The first RS starts at 120 min,
upon exposure of N-terminal arginine to recog-
nition by PS691. Subsequent cleavage events
sequentially expose N-terminal leucine, iso-
leucine, and phenylalanine to their corresponding
recognizers, with fast transitions (average <10 s)
from one RS to the next. The transition from
leucine to isoleucine recognition by PS961 is
readily identified as a sharp change in average
PD. This overall pattern is replicated across
many instances of sequencing of the same
peptide, with similar PD statistics across traces,
as each peptide molecule follows the same re-
action pathway over the course of the sequenc-
ing run (Fig. 3, B and C). Owing to the stochastic
timing of cleavage events, each trace displays
distinct start times and durations for each RS
(Fig. 3C).
This approach reports the binding kinetics
at each recognizable amino acid position and
the kinetics of aminopeptidase cleavage along
the peptide sequence. High-precision kinetic
information on binding is obtained from a
single trace because each RS typically contains
tens to hundreds of on-off binding events, re-
sulting in a distribution of PD and interpulse
duration (IPD) measurements that can be
analyzed statistically. The repetitive probing
of each NAA also provides accurate recognizer
calling because calls are not based on the error-
prone detection of a single event associated with
one fluorophore molecule (fig. S1F). Recognizer
on-rate and concentration govern IPD for each
RS; higher recognizer concentrations result in
shorter average IPDs and faster rates of pulsing
(fig. S3, A and B). Higher recognizer concen-
trations, however, increase the fluorescence
background from freely diffusing recognizers,
resulting in lower pulse signal-to-noise ratios,
and can compete with aminopeptidases for
N-terminal access. In practice, IPDs in the
range of ~2 to 10 s provide a favorable balance
among these factors.
The distribution of RS durations across an
ensemble of replicate traces defines the rate
of cleavage of each recognizable NAA. For
DQQRLIFAG peptide, we observed average
cleavage times of 30, 55, 40, and 88 min for
N-terminal arginine, leucine, isoleucine, and
phenylalanine, respectively, with approximate
single-exponential decay statistics for each
position (Fig. 3D and fig. S3C). The distribution
of NRS durations reports the cleavage rate of a
run of one or more nonrecognized NAAs. The
average NRS duration for the initial DQQ motif
was 155 min (Fig. 3D). Average cleavage rates
are a key parameter and are controlled by the
aminopeptidase concentration in the assay (fig.
S3, D and E). Given the exponential behavior,
we target average RS durations of 10 to 40 min
Reed et al., Science 378, 186–192 (2022)
14 October 2022
4 of 6
Fig. 4. Detection of single amino acid changes and PTMs. (A and B) Dynamic
sequencing of synthetic peptides that differ by a single amino acid: RLAFAYPDDD
(top), RLIFAYPDDD (middle), and RLVFAYPDDD (bottom). Example traces are
shown in (A). Scatterplots of RS mean PD versus bin ratio are shown in (B).
(C and D) Detection of oxidized methionine in the peptide RLMFAYPDDD.
Distributions of mean PD for leucine are shown in (C); labels indicate populations
with leucine followed by methionine (LM) or methionine sulfoxide (LMo). Shown
in (D) are example traces in which methionine is recognized by PS961 and
leucine exhibits a long PD (top) or in which methionine is not recognized, owing
to oxidation, and in which leucine exhibits a short PD (bottom). (E) Scatterplots
of RS mean PD versus bin ratio for runs in which oxidation was not controlled
(left) or in which methionine was fully oxidized (right).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on September 07, 2025


--- Page 5 ---
to provide sufficient time for pulsing data col-
lection, avoid missed RSs due to rapid cleavage,
and minimize excessively long RS durations.
We found it helpful to visualize the sequenc-
ing profiles of peptides as kinetic signature
plots—simplified trace-like representations of
the time course of complete peptide sequenc-
ing containing the median PD for each RS and
the average duration of each RS and NRS (Fig.
3E). These highly characteristic features provide
a wealth of sequence-dependent information
for mapping traces from peptides to their pro-
teins of origin.
To demonstrate that this core methodology
and its kinetic principles apply to a wide range
of peptide sequences, we sequenced the syn-
thetic peptides DQQIASSRLAASFAAQQYPDDD,
RLAFSALGAADDD, and EFIAWLV (E, glu-
tamate; P, proline)—a segment of human
glucagon-like peptide–1 (GLP-1)—under the same
sequencing conditions used for DQQRLIFAG
(Fig. 3F). Each peptide generated a characteristic
kinetic signature in accordance with its se-
quence (Fig. 3G). We obtained readouts as far
as position 18 (the furthest recognizable amino
acid) in the peptide DQQIASSRLAASFAAQ-
QYPDDD, illustrating that the method is com-
patible with long peptides and capable of deep
access to sequence information in peptides.
Distinctive kinetic signatures from single
amino acid changes and PTMs
To illustrate how the kinetic parameters acquired
from sequencing are sensitive to changes in
sequence composition, we performed sequenc-
ing with a set of three peptides—RLAFAYPDDD,
RLIFAYPDDD, and RLVFAYPDDD—that differ
only at a single position, located immediately
downstream from the PS961 N-terminal target
leucine (Fig. 4A). Each type of amino acid at this
position had a distinct effect on the PD acquired
during recognition of N-terminal leucine by
PS961. We observed median PDs of 1.29, 2.22,
and 4.21 s for LAF, LIF, and LVF, respectively
(Fig. 4B). In addition to differences in PD for
leucine, each peptide displayed a characteristic
RS or NRS in the interval between leucine and
phenylalanine recognition (Fig. 4A and fig. S4A).
These results demonstrate the sensitivity of the
sequencing readout to variation at a single posi-
tion and illustrate that both directly recognized
NAAs and adjacent residues can influence the
full kinetic signature obtained from sequencing.
Because the aminoacyl-proline bond of the
YP motif in peptides such as RLIFAYPDDD
cannot be cleaved by the PhTET aminopepti-
dases (11, 12), observation of YP pulsing at
the end of a trace ensures that cleavage has
progressed completely from the first to last
recognizable amino acid. The sequencing
output from RLIFAYPDDD, therefore, provided
a convenient dataset for examining biochem-
ical sources of nonideal behavior that could
lead to errors in peptide identification. The
main sources of incomplete information in
traces were deletions of expected RSs due to
the stochastic occurrence of rapid sequential
cleavage events (fig. S4B) and early termi-
nation of reads resulting from photodamage
or surface detachment (fig. S4C).
In addition to changes in amino acid se-
quence composition, sequencing readouts
are sensitive to changes due to PTMs. As an
example, we examined methionine oxidation.
The thioether moiety of the methionine side
chain is susceptible to oxidation during peptide
synthesis and sequencing. We determined
that PS961 binds a peptide with N-terminal
methionine with a dissociation constant (Kd)
of 947 ± 47 nM (fig. S4D) and hypothesized
that oxidation, resulting in a polar methionine
sulfoxide side chain, would eliminate binding
and reduce NAA binding affinity when located
at P2. We determined computationally that
methionine sulfoxide is highly unfavorable in
the PS961 NAA binding pocket and that non-
polar residues are preferred at P2 (fig. S4E and
fig. S2H). We sequenced the synthetic peptide
RLMFAYPDDD (M, methionine) and observed
two populations of traces with distinct kinetic
signatures—afirstpopulationcontainingleucine
recognition with a median PD of 0.86 s and a
second population with a median PD of 0.35 s
(Fig. 4C). Traces from the first population also
displayed methionine recognition with a short
PD in the time interval between leucine and
phenylalanine recognition (Fig. 4D). Methio-
nine recognition was absent in traces from the
second population (Fig. 4D), indicating that
the methionine side chain in these peptides
was not capable of recognition by PS961.
When we fully oxidized methionine by prein-
cubation with hydrogen peroxide (see mate-
rials and methods), we observed elimination of
both methionine recognition and the leucine
Reed et al., Science 378, 186–192 (2022)
14 October 2022
5 of 6
Fig. 5. Discrimination of peptides in mixtures and mapping peptides to
the human proteome. (A) Example traces from sequencing a mixture of the
peptides DQQRLIFAG and RLAFSALGAADDD on the same chip; the chip window
indicates the location of reaction chambers producing a sequencing readout
for each peptide. (B) Example traces from the dynamic sequencing of
two peptides, DQQRLIFAGK (top) and EFIAWLVK (bottom), isolated from the
recombinant human proteins ubiquitin and GLP-1, respectively. (C) Diagram
illustrating the identification of the protein ubiquitin as a match to the kinetic
signature from DQQRLIFAGK peptide in an in silico digest of the human
proteome based on kinetic information.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on September 07, 2025


--- Page 6 ---
recognition cluster with a long median PD, as
expected (Fig. 4E). These results demonstrate
the capability for extremely sensitive detec-
tion of PTMs owing to their kinetic effects on
recognition.
Sequencing peptide mixtures and mapping
peptides derived from human proteins
Proteomics applications require identification
of peptides in mixtures derived from biological
sources. To extend our results to peptide
mixtures and biologically derived peptides,
we performed two experiments. First, we
mixed DQQRLIFAG and RLAFSALGAADDD
peptides, immobilized them on the same chip,
and performed a sequencing run. Data analy-
sis (see materials and methods) identified two
populations of traces corresponding to each
peptide, with kinetic signatures in close agree-
ment with those identified in runs with indi-
vidual peptides (Fig. 5A and fig. S4F). Second,
to demonstrate that our method extends to
biologically derived peptides, we performed
sequencing runs with peptide libraries gen-
erated using a simple workflow from recom-
binant human ubiquitin (76 amino acids) and
GLP-1 (37 amino acids) proteins digested with
AspN/LysC and trypsin, respectively (see mate-
rials and methods). For both libraries, data
analysis readily identified traces matching
the expected recognition pattern for the pro-
tease cleavage products DQQRLIFAGK and
EFIAWLVK (K, lysine) for ubiquitin and GLP-1,
respectively, and produced kinetic signatures
in agreement with synthetic versions of these
peptides (Fig. 5B and fig. S4G). We identified
matches to the kinetic signature of the ubi-
quitin peptide DQQRLIFAGK across the human
proteome, taking advantage of simple sequence
constraints provided by kinetic information
(see materials and methods). We found only
one protein other than ubiquitin that con-
tained a peptide that could potentially match
this signature (Fig. 5C); thus, even short sig-
natures can exhibit proteome abundance of
<1 in 104 proteins. These results illustrate the
potential of the full kinetic output from se-
quencing to enable digital mapping of peptides
to their proteins of origin.
Conclusions
Our simple, real-time dynamic approach differs
markedly from other recently described single-
molecule approaches that rely on complex,
iterative methods involving stepwise Edman
chemistry or hundreds of cycles of epitope
probing (15–17). Nanopore approaches offer
the potential for real-time readouts and sim-
plicity but face substantial challenges related
to the size and biophysical complexity of poly-
peptides (18–20). Our sequencing technology
is readily expanded in its capabilities, and there
are multiple areas for improvement. Expansion
of proteome coverage can be achieved through
directed evolution and engineering of recog-
nizers. The NAA targets demonstrated here
make up ~35.6% of the human proteome, but
lower-affinity NAA targets require longer PDs
to enable detection in all sequence contexts.
Recognizers for new amino acids or PTMs
can be evolved from current recognizers or
identified in screens of other scaffolds, such
as other types of NAA- or PTM-binding pro-
teins or aptamers. Extension to detection
of all 20 natural amino acids and multiple
PTMs is feasible for de novo sequencing; how-
ever, partial sequences are sufficient for most
proteomics applications, which rely on map-
ping to predefined sets of candidate proteins
(21). Aminopeptidases can be engineered to
optimize cleavage rates and minimize RS
deletions from rapid sequential cleavage. We
envision that the dynamic range of samples
and the applications most suitable for the
system will tend to scale with the number of
reaction chambers on the chip and that com-
pression of dynamic range will be necessary
for certain applications. We anticipate that
future developments of the platform will in-
crease the accessibility of proteomics studies
and enable discoveries in biological and clinical
research.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
S. Goodwin, J. D. McPherson, W. R. McCombie, Nat. Rev. Genet.
17, 333–351 (2016).
2.
W. Timp, G. Timp, Sci. Adv. 6, eaax8978 (2020).
3.
R. Aebersold et al., Nat. Chem. Biol. 14, 206–214 (2018).
4.
M. Beck et al., Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, 549 (2011).
5.
N. L. Anderson, N. G. Anderson, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 1,
845–867 (2002).
6.
Y. Liu, A. Beyer, R. Aebersold, Cell 165, 535–550
(2016).
7.
J. Tullman, N. Callahan, B. Ellington, Z. Kelman, J. P. Marino,
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 103, 2621–2633 (2019).
8.
D. A. Dougan, B. G. Reid, A. L. Horwich, B. Bukau, Mol. Cell 9,
673–683 (2002).
9.
B. J. Stein, R. A. Grant, R. T. Sauer, T. A. Baker, Structure 24,
232–242 (2016).
10. T. Tasaki, Y. T. Kwon, Trends Biochem. Sci. 32, 520–528
(2007).
11. M. A. Durá et al., Mol. Microbiol. 72, 26–40 (2009).
12. M. A. Durá et al., Biochemistry 44, 3477–3486 (2005).
13. W. S. Choi et al., Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17, 1175–1181
(2010).
14. J. Muñoz-Escobar, E. Matta-Camacho, C. Cho, G. Kozlov,
K. Gehring, Structure 25, 719–729.e3 (2017).
15. J. Swaminathan et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 1076–1082 (2018).
16. J. D. Egertson et al., bioRxiv 2021.10.11.463967 [Preprint]
(2021); https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.11.463967.
17. M. Chee, K. Gunderson, M. P. Weiner, Macromolecule analysis
employing nucleic acid encoding (2019); https://pdfaiw.uspto.
gov/.aiw?Docid=20190145982.
18. S. Zhang et al., Nat. Chem. 13, 1192–1199 (2021).
19. H. Brinkerhoff, A. S. W. Kang, J. Liu, A. Aksimentiev, C. Dekker,
Science 374, 1509–1513 (2021).
20. J. A. Alfaro et al., Nat. Methods 18, 604–617 (2021).
21. J. Swaminathan, A. A. Boulgakov, E. M. Marcotte, PLOS
Comput. Biol. 11, e1004080 (2015).
22. B. D. Reed, M. J. Meyer, J. F. Beltrán, Code and data for
“Real-time dynamic single-molecule protein sequencing
on an integrated semiconductor device.” Zenodo (2022);
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7017750.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank E. Chen for helpful discussions in preparing the
manuscript. Funding: This work was funded by Quantum-Si, Inc.
Author contributions: A.D.G., A.L., A.M.v.O., A.P.-K., B.D.R.,
B.S., C.L., D.H.P., E.M., F.L., G.P., H.H., J.A.B., J.P., J.T., J.Z., K.B.,
K.F.C., M.Mi., M.M.E., M.P., M.R.-C., M.W.B., N.D.B., N.S., O.A., R.B.,
R.N., S.Ha., S.G., S.S.P., T.D.C., X.S., and Y.-C.W. developed
methods and reagents for protein sequencing; A. Bu., D. Be., D.F.,
G.A., G.K., J.F.B., M.D., M.J.M., S.F.S., S.L., V.A., and Z.Z. developed
software; and A. Bel., A. Bet., A.K., B.L., C.C., D.Bo., E.A.G.W.,
F.R.A., G.S., J.B., J.C., J.D., J.S., K.P., K.R., L.H., M.B., M.F., P.A.,
P.L., P.T., R.Cl., R.Cu., S.Ho., S.C., T.C., T.R., T.R.T., X.M., X.W., and
Z.H. developed semiconductor chips, nanophotonics, lasers, and
instruments. J.M.R., M.Mc., T.R., B.D.R., M.D., G.S., M.F., P.L.,
and M.D.D. supervised and/or acquired resources and funding. B.D.R.,
M.J.M., M.P., and B.S. designed experiments and/or generated
the single-molecule recognition and sequencing data presented
in the figures. B.D.R., M.J.M., and J.F.B. analyzed sequencing
data and prepared the figures. M.P. and G.P. characterized
recognizer ensemble kinetic properties. O.A. generated libraries
from recombinant proteins. H.H. and Y.-C.W. generated model
peptides. D.H.P. performed computational modeling. B.D.R. led the
study and wrote the manuscript with review and commentary from
coauthors. All authors met the criteria for authorship and
contributed critically to the development of the sequencing method
and platform by conducting experiments, developing methods and
concepts, analyzing and interpreting data, developing software,
supervising research, or acquiring funding. Competing interests:
All authors affiliated with Quantum-Si, Inc., along with A.D.G. and
A.M.v.O., are shareholders and/or are listed as inventors on
patents owned by Quantum-Si, Inc.; A.D.G. and A.M.v.O. are on the
scientific advisory board of Quantum-Si, Inc., and are paid
consultants. The technology presented in this paper is the subject
of numerous pending or awarded patents filed by Quantum-Si,
Inc., with the US Patent and Trademark Office and international
offices. Data and materials availability: Data and custom code used
in this paper are available for download online at Zenodo (22).
Sequencing reagents and instruments are available from Quantum-Si,
Inc., under a material transfer agreement. License information:
Copyright © 2022 the authors, some rights reserved; exclusive
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No
claim to original US government works. https://www.science.org/
about/science-licenses-journal-article-reuse
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abo7651
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S4
Table S1
References (23–27)
View/request a protocol for this paper from Bio-protocol.
Submitted 28 February 2022; accepted 13 September 2022
10.1126/science.abo7651
Reed et al., Science 378, 186–192 (2022)
14 October 2022
6 of 6
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on September 07, 2025
