--- Page 1 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
Department of Biology, 
Box 355325, University of 
Washington, Seattle, 
Washington 98195, USA. 
e-mail: comai@u.
washington.edu
doi:10.1038/nrg1711
Published online 
11 October 2005
NEOPOLYPLOID
A polyploid that has been 
produced by artificially 
inducing chromosome 
doubling.
DIPLOIDIZATION
Gradual conversion from 
polyploidy to diploidy through 
genetic changes that 
differentiate duplicated loci.
SUBFUNCTIONALIZATION
Retention by duplicated genes 
of different components of the 
original common function.
NEOFUNCTIONALIZATION
Acquisition of novel function by 
a duplicated gene.
Polyploidy is the heritable condition of possessing 
more than two complete sets of chromosomes. Most 
polyploids have an even number of sets of chromo-
somes, with four being the most common (tetraploidy). 
Polyploids are very common among plants and com-
mon among fish and amphibians, and are usually fit and 
well adapted. Indeed, the study of eukaryotic genomes 
is providing surprising proof of the evolutionary poten-
tial of polyploids: many sequenced genomes display 
the signature of polyploidy ancestry1–8. This indicates 
that polyploidy can bestow long-term evolutionary 
flexibility, instead of freezing species in a static state 
that is enforced by gene redundancy, as was originally 
proposed9.
In fact, polyploidy can be advantageous. On the basis 
of the phenotypic and molecular characterization of 
NEOPOLYPLOIDS, it has been inferred that after polyploids 
form they pass through a bottleneck of instability10–13, 
before becoming adapted and joining the evolutionary 
fray as efficient competitors of their diploid relatives. 
Adapted polyploids that avoid extinction enter an 
evolutionary trajectory of DIPLOIDIZATION, during which 
genomic redundancy is reduced14,15. Duplicated genes 
can be lost, retained or maintained as duplicates, often 
undergoing SUBFUNCTIONALIZATION and NEOFUNCTIONALIZA
TION16,17. Bioinformatic and theoretical analyses indicate 
that these processes are often not random and that the 
function and properties of the encoded protein affect 
the outcome18–25. By providing duplicated genes, poly-
ploidization might fuel long-term diversification and 
evolutionary success.
In this review I discuss possible advantages of 
polyploidy and constraints on polyploid formation 
that are indicated by either experimental evidence or 
theoretical considerations. Becoming and remaining 
polyploid changes the organization and function of 
the genome at both genetic and EPIGENETIC levels. For 
example, in addition to the creation of gene redun-
dancy, polyploidy causes nuclear enlargement and 
increases the complexity of the processes that are 
involved in managing and partitioning chromosomes 
during cell division. Perhaps the most striking evi-
dence of change comes from the discovery of epige-
netic remodelling, which leads to both the activation 
and suppression of gene expression. Although some 
of these changes are potentially advantageous, many 
cause instability of the neopolyploids and might be 
disruptive. This review of how polyploids form and 
adapt will not only be useful to readers who are inter-
ested in the evolutionary role of polyploids. It will also 
be useful to those who are interested in how parental 
gene interactions can lead to HETEROSIS or DYSGENESIS, 
THE ADVANTAGES AND 
DISADVANTAGES OF BEING 
POLYPLOID
Luca Comai
Abstract | Polyploids — organisms that have multiple sets of chromosomes — are common in 
certain plant and animal taxa, and can be surprisingly stable. The evidence that has emerged 
from genome analyses also indicates that many other eukaryotic genomes have a polyploid 
ancestry, suggesting that both humans and most other eukaryotes have either benefited from 
or endured polyploidy. Studies of polyploids soon after their formation have revealed genetic 
and epigenetic interactions between redundant genes. These interactions can be related to 
the phenotypes and evolutionary fates of polyploids. Here, I consider the advantages and 
challenges of polyploidy, and its evolutionary potential.
836 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 
 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
R E V I E W S


--- Page 2 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
Speciation
Duplication
Diploid
Diploid species BB
Diploid species AA
Triploid (AAA)
Autotetrapoloid
(AAAA)
Allotetrapoloid
(AABB)
Partially diploidized tetraploids
Diploid
2N gamete
2N gamete
2N + 2N 
gametes
2N gamete
2N + 1N gametes
F1 (AB)
Diploidization
Diploidy
Diploidy
Polyploidy
EPIGENETIC
A mitotically stable change in 
gene expression that depends 
not on a change in DNA 
sequence, but on covalent 
modifications of DNA or 
chromatin proteins such as 
histones.
HETEROSIS
The increase in performance 
displayed by hybrids 
compared with their inbred 
parents. Because performance 
can be a subjective trait (for 
example, age of reproduction), 
a more precise definition is 
non-additive inheritance in 
which a trait in the F1 
transgresses both parental 
values.
in how epigenetic patterns are maintained or altered, 
and in how structural features of genomic organiza-
tion affect cellular functions. 
The mechanics of polyploidy
Formation and incidence of polyploidy. Polyploids are 
divided into categories depending on their chromosomal 
composition and their manner of formation. Polyploids 
arise when a rare mitotic or meiotic catastrophe causes 
the formation of gametes that have more than one set of 
chromosomes (FIG. 1). Diploid gametes, which arise infre-
quently, typically fuse with haploid ones and produce tri-
ploid zygotes, which are unstable and can either be sterile 
or contribute to further polyploid gametes, depending 
on the species26. The fusion of diploid gametes leads to 
tetraploid zygotes, which are potentially stable.
There is a basic distinction between autopolyploids 
and allopolyploids. Both have multiple sets of chromo-
somes, but in the former these are of the same type 
and have the same origin, whereas in the latter both 
the type and the origin are different. This is because 
autopolyploidy results from a mutation in chromo-
some number whereas allopolyploidy results from 
concurrent hybridization and mutations in chromo-
some number. The total number of chromosome sets is 
indicated by the prefix; for example, tri- (3), tetra- (4), 
penta- (5), hexa- (6) and octa- (8). 
Meiotic pairing arrangements vary between ploidy 
types (FIG. 2). In particular, the increased complexity of 
pairing can cause the deletion or addition of chromo-
somes from the balanced complement that is expected 
in the gametes (FIG. 2b). The division between autopoly-
ploids and allopolyploids is not absolute. The chromo-
some sets of allopolyploids differ proportionally to the 
divergence of the parental genomes: the closer the 
parents, the more similar the resulting allopolyploid is 
to an autopolyploid. This potential ambiguity between 
classes of polyploidy has been addressed by proposing 
a third class, segmental allopolyploidy27, but the utility 
of this category is questionable.
An immediate consequence of polyploidy is the 
change in gametic and filial frequencies. Mendel’s rules 
of segregation and assortment still apply but there is an 
increase in the number of ‘‘factors’’ to consider. This 
produces ratios that are different from those that were 
observed by Mendel in diploid peas12 (FIG. 3).
Polyploids form at relatively high frequency (1 per 
100,000) in flowering plants26. Because of this high 
formation rate and the polyploidy tolerance of plants, 
stable polyploidy is common in plants. The frequent 
occurrence of stable polyploidy in fish and frogs28 indi-
cates that the formation of  polyploids is also possible in 
animals, even if it is only stable in certain animal taxa. 
Indeed, higher vertebrates do not tolerate polyploidy, 
but 10% of spontaneous abortions in humans are due 
to polyploidy29.
Advantages of polyploidy
There are three documented or obvious advantages of 
becoming polyploid. The first two, heterosis and gene 
redundancy, are the result of gene duplication, whereas 
the mechanistic connection to polyploidy of the third, 
asexual reproduction, is unclear. Heterosis causes poly-
ploids to be more vigorous than their diploid progeni-
tors, whereas gene redundancy shields polyploids from 
the deleterious effect of mutations. Asexual reproduc-
tion enables polyploids to reproduce in the absence of 
sexual mates.
Heterosis. Polyploids take advantage of heterosis in at 
least three ways. One involves the fixing of divergent 
parental genomes in allopolyploids. Whereas heterozy-
gosity and heterosis decay in the progeny of a diploid 
F1 hybrid (at each generation half the heterozygous 
loci become homozygous), the enforced pairing of 
homologous chromosomes in allopolyploids prevents 
intergenomic recombination, effectively maintaining 
the same level of heterozygosity through the genera-
tions (FIGS 2,3). Heterosis can also be exploited at the 
1N (haploid) stages of polyploid plants (gametes and 
gametophytes, consisting of pollen and egg sac)30,31 
Figure 1 | Evolutionary alternation of diploidy and polyploidy. The figure shows the 
possible paths that result in the sudden transition from diploidy to polyploidy and the gradual 
transition from polyploidy to diploidy. The hybridization events that result in ALLOPOLYPLOIDY are 
also illustrated. For simplicity, not all possible paths are drawn. Triploids, for example, are 
shown contributing to autotetraploids but they can also contribute to allopolyploids. For each 
ploidy form, the haploid genome is represented by a coloured circle or oval inside the beige-
filled nuclear shape. Genomes that are illustrated by ovals reflect the increased gene number 
that results from the retention and subfunctionalization of duplicates during diploidization. 
Circles or ovals of different colours represent diverged genomes. Highly unstable ploidy forms 
have dashed nuclear contours. A and B represent genome types and N is the gametic 
chromosome number.
NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 
 VOLUME 6 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 837
R E V I E W S


--- Page 3 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
Meiosis I
(early anaphase)
Diploid (AA)
F1 hybrid (AB)
Gametes
Gametes
Gametes
Gametes
Daughter cells
Daughter cells
Diploid (BB)
Autotetraploid (AAAA)
Allotetraploid (AABB)
Diploid
Centrosome
Tetraploid
Genome 
duplication
a  Meiosis
b  Meiotic errors
c  Mitosis
DYSGENESIS
Sterility or other deleterious 
trait of an F1 hybrid that results 
from incompatibilities between 
parental genomes.
and might also be exploited in animals (by sperm and 
eggs), as postmeiotic expression of certain genes is seen 
in both taxa32–34.
The mechanism that is responsible for the third 
advantage of heterosis is unknown. Autopolyploid 
hybrids show stronger heterosis than the cor-
responding diploid hybrids, and autopolyploid 
inbreds show stronger INBREEDING DEPRESSION than 
diploid inbreds35–38. These conclusions are based 
on a limited number of studies, so additional ones 
are needed that compare hybrids that are derived 
from verified, highly inbred parental genomes. The 
increased vigour of polyploid hybrids (as opposed 
to polyploid inbreds) is probably responsible for the 
widespread, but unfounded, belief that polyploids 
are larger than the corresponding diploids. Inbred 
polyploids are in fact smaller12 than or similar in 
size (A. Madlung, B. Dilkes and L.C., unpublished 
observations) to inbred diploids.
Gene redundancy. An advantage conferred by gene 
redundancy is the masking of recessive alleles by 
dominant wild-type alleles. This effect can act at 
two life stages, the first of which is the gametophytic, 
haploid stage. Although this form of the organism has 
reduced complexity, its function requires the activity 
of many genes39,40. This requirement exposes pollen 
and egg sac to the action of lethal and deleterious 
loss-of-function mutations. By contrast, in the dip-
loid gametophytes of polyploid organisms deleterious 
recessives can be masked by wild-type alleles. In the 
second, 2N phase, polyploidy can reduce the inci-
dence of homozygous recessives41,42: whereas diploid 
Aa heterozygotes produce 1/4 aa homozygotes, AAaa 
autopolyploids produce between 1/36 and 1/22 aaaa 
homozygotes, and AaAa allopolyploids produce 1/16 
aaaa homozygotes12 (FIG. 3). The protective effect of 
polyploidy against deleterious recessive mutations 
and GENOTOXICITY might be important when isolated 
and severely bottlenecked populations are forced to 
inbreed, at a time when the purging of deleterious 
alleles is made difficult by the reduced number of 
breeding individuals.
Another advantage conferred by gene redundancy is 
the ability to diversify gene function by altering redun-
dant copies of important or essential genes. In diploids, 
such an ability is conditional on the occurrence of a 
rare segmental duplication event. In polyploids, on 
the other hand, all genes have a duplicated copy that is 
available for evolutionary experimentation14,16,43,44.
Loss of self-incompatibility and gain of asexual repro-
duction. Polyploidy can affect sexuality in ways that 
provide selective advantages. One way is by disrupting 
certain self-incompatibility systems, allowing self-
fertilization45. The molecular basis of this response is 
unclear. In allopolyploids of A. thaliana it might result 
from interactions between the parental genomes10,46. In 
the autopolyploid, Petunia hybrida, it could result from 
interallelic interactions in the 2X pollen (where X is 
the normal chromosome number)47. Another way is by 
favouring the onset of asexual reproduction, which is 
associated with polyploidy in both animals and plants 
BOX 1.
In summary, the advantages of polyploidy are caused 
by the ability to make better use of heterozygosity, the 
buffering effect of gene redundancy on mutations and, 
in certain cases the facilitation of reproduction through 
self-fertilization or asexual means.
Figure 2 | Polyploid formation and ensuing meiotic and mitotic irregularities. The figure 
illustrates the chromosomal composition and behaviour of diploids and derived polyploids at 
different developmental times in meiosis (a,b) and mitosis (c). a | Early anaphase of meiosis I 
with separating chromosome pairs (central panel) and gametes (side panels) of diploid 
ancestors (top) and their autotetraploids and allotetraploids (bottom). The pairing of 
homologous chromosomes is defective in the F1 hybrid because of divergence in the structure 
and number of chromosomes. Pairing is restored by genome duplication; this produces an 
allotetraploid, in which the two HOMEOLOGOUS chromosome sets pair independently. In the 
autotetraploid, pairing involves frequent MULTIVALENTS, as four chromosomes of each type are 
present. b | Two examples of meiotic irregularities, resulting in laggard chromosomes (left) and 
ANEUPLOID gametes (right). For simplicity, the two-chromatid structure of each anaphase 
chromosome is not shown in panels a and b. Instead, two illustrative gametes are shown per 
meiosis. c | In animal cells the CENTROSOME number responds to the increase in genome size 
by forming multiple spindles that result in unbalanced mitotic products.
838 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 
 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
R E V I E W S


--- Page 4 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
Diploid
Autotetraploid
Allotetraploid
Meiosis I pairing
Gametes
P
A
A
a
a
AA
Aa
aa
A
a
A
a
A
a
Centromere
Alleles of a gene
AA
Aa
aA
aa
0.5
0.5
0.17
0.17
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.67
ALLOPOLYPLOID
A polyploid that is generated 
through hybridization and thus 
combines different types of 
chromosome sets; by contrast, 
an autopolyploid arises through 
the multiplication of the same 
chromosome set.
HOMEOLOGOUS
Duplicated genes or 
chromosomes that are derived 
from different parental species 
and are related by ancestry.
MULTIVALENT
Meiotic association of more 
than two chromosomes, 
resulting in synapsis and 
recombination between 
partners.
ANEUPLOIDY
The property of having a 
chromosome number that is not 
an exact multiple of X.
CENTROSOME
The microtubule-organizing 
centre that divides to organize 
the two poles of the mitotic 
spindle and directs assembly of 
the cytoskeleton, so controlling 
cell division, motility and shape.
INBREEDING DEPRESSION
The loss of vigour and fitness 
that is observed when genome-
wide heterozygosity is 
decreased by inbreeding.
GENOTOXICITY
The action of chemical, physical 
and biological agents that 
damage DNA.
ENDOREDUPLICATION
Successive rounds of DNA 
replication without cytokinesis.
ENDOPOLYPLOIDY
The property of cells in certain 
developmental stages of an 
organism of having more 
chromatid sets or, less 
frequently, more chromosome 
sets than the germ line.
Disadvantages of polyploidy
There are several disadvantages of polyploidy, both 
documented and theoretical. They include the 
disrupting effects of nuclear and cell enlargement, 
the propensity of polyploid mitosis and meiosis to 
produce aneuploid cells and the epigenetic instabil-
ity that results in transgressive (non-additive) gene 
regulation.
Changes in cellular architecture, and regulatory impli-
cations. Increasing the genomic content of an organism 
usually increases cell volume48,49, with a consequent 
change in the relationship between the tridimensional 
and bidimensional components of the cell. An example 
of crucial components having different dimensional 
properties is provided by chromatin and the nuclear 
envelope. According to the relationship between vol-
ume and surface of a sphere, doubling the genome 
is expected to double the volume that is occupied by 
chromatin, but cause only a 1.6-fold increase in the 
nuclear envelope surface. This difference, although 
apparently modest, can change the stoichiometry of the 
interaction between components of chromatin that are 
located at the nuclear periphery and envelope-bound 
proteins. The tridimensional organization of chromo-
somes in the nucleus involves the peripheral position-
ing of telomeric and centromeric heterochromatin 
(see, for example,  REFS 5052). Lamins, which form 
a fibrous network that lines the inside of the nuclear 
envelope, interact with heterochromatin and have a 
function that is vital to the cell. This is demonstrated 
by the phenotypic effects of laminar abnormalities on 
human health53. In addition, many heterochromatin 
components54 and at least one lamin55 exhibit dosage 
sensitivity. Therefore, differential growth of the inter-
nal versus surface components of the nucleus might 
cause dosage imbalance, which would have regulatory 
repercussions. The plant orthologues of lamins are not 
known, although there are candidate proteins with 
orthologous functions56,57.
An increase in the amount of DNA and, conse-
quently, in cell volume can be advantageous for cells 
that have high metabolic rates58. Most organisms, from 
bacteria59,60 to eukaryotes61,62, can also modulate the 
amount of DNA in their nucleus by undergoing DNA 
ENDOREDUPLICATION, which leads to larger, ENDOPOLYPLOID 
cells. Therefore, endopolyploidy provides an effective 
solution to the problem of producing cells with dif-
ferent volumes in response to developmental needs. 
However, it is important to distinguish heritable poly-
ploidy from developmental endopolyploidy, as the two 
states are not equivalent BOX 2.
In nematodes, body size is related to cell size and 
polyploidy63,64, but this is an exception. Notably, 
comparison of inbred diploid and polyploid A. thal-
iana (A. Madlung, B. Dilkes and L.C., unpublished 
observations), salamanders65 and mice66 indicates 
that the larger cells of polyploids do not necessar-
ily result in larger bodies. Instead, a developmental 
mechanism regulates organ growth to compensate 
for cell size.
Difficulties in mitosis. Polyploidy is a problem for 
the normal completion of mitosis and meiosis. 
Autotetraploid yeast shows an increased mitotic loss 
of chromosomes, which results in aneuploid cells11. 
Difficulties in mitosis can arise from spindle irregulari-
ties. For example, in animal cells, tetraploidy triggers 
the G1-tetraploidy checkpoint, a response that is medi-
ated by p53 REF. 67. If this checkpoint is bypassed after 
the four S phase centrosomes are present, unless they 
are clustered in a two-by-two bipolar arrangement, the 
results are multipolar spindles, the chaotic segregation 
of chromatids and the production of aneuploid cells68 
(FIG. 2c). Sensitivity of mitotic chromosomal segrega-
tion to ploidy also occurs in wild-type yeast11,69, where 
it is further demonstrated by the ploidy-conditional 
Figure 3 | Contrasting patterns of inheritance in diploids 
and polyploids. The figure illustrates meiotic arrangements 
and gametic output in a diploid, an autotetraploid and an 
allotetraploid. For simplicity, the two chromatids that make up 
each chromosome are not shown. A diploid heterozygote Aa 
(A, dark red; a, pink) produces two types of gamete in equal 
proportion (P). Polyploids produce multiple types of gamete 
but the pattern differs according to the type of polyploidy. An 
autotetraploid with genotype AAaa produces three types of 
gamete in ratios that vary according to the distance of the 
locus from the centromere (black circle): unlinked loci assort 
as 8 chromatids whereas centromere-linked loci (shown here) 
assort as 4 chromosomes. An allotetraploid with genotype 
AaAa (A, dark red; a, pink; A, dark green; a, light green) 
produces four types of gamete. Note that in the allotetraploid 
each genome contributes to the gametes according to 
diploidy rules (see FIG. 2a for the meiotic pairing pattern that 
occurs in this case).
NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 
 VOLUME 6 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 839
R E V I E W S


--- Page 5 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
APOMICTIC 
Species that produce embryos 
from maternal tissues, 
bypassing normal meiosis and 
sexual fusion of egg and sperm.
SEGREGATION DISTORTION
Departure from the expected 
gametic ratio of alleles that is 
observed in the progeny of a 
cross, usually caused by 
preferential loss of certain 
chromosomes during 
gametogenesis (meiotic drive) 
or by selection on gametes and 
zygotes.
PLASTICITY 
The ability of the same genotype 
to change and adapt its 
phenotype in response to 
different environmental 
conditions.
EUPLOID
An organism or cell that has a 
balanced set of chromosomes.
lethality of mutations in the gene that encodes the 
microtubule-associated protein, BIK1 REF. 70. BIK1 is 
required for normal cytoskeletal function and its loss 
has no major consequences in diploids but results in 
mitotic lethality in tetraploids.
There is little information on the mitotic stabil-
ity of polyploid plant cells. Organization of the plant 
mitotic spindle does not depend on centrosomes and, 
although knowledge of the dynamics of mitotic spin-
dle formation is emerging71,72, the response of such 
a system to polyploidy is unknown. Interestingly, 
multiple spindles have been reported in autotetra-
ploid plant meiosis (see, for example, REF. 73). Even 
if aneuploid cells are formed from polyploid ones, it 
is possible, given the PLASTICITY of plant development, 
that aneuploid cells grow more slowly and are over-
taken by the preferential proliferation of surrounding 
EUPLOID cells.
In conclusion, although the susceptibility of 
autopolyploids to the mitotic production of aneu-
ploids might vary from taxon to taxon, the available 
data indicate the existence of a considerable risk of 
aneuploidy.
Difficulties in meiosis: autopolyploids. Meiosis that 
involves three or more sets of chromosomes can pro-
duce aneuploids, with the frequency and manner of 
aneuploid production depending on the type of poly-
ploidy. Here, I consider autotetraploidy, autotriploidy 
and allotetraploidy. Autopolyploids have the potential 
to form MULTIVALENTS at meiotic metaphase I. The reso-
lution of a tetravalent at anaphase I is more difficult 
than the resolution of a bivalent12, as a tetravalent 
can produce abnormal segregation patterns such as 
‘3:1’ or ‘2:1 plus one laggard’ (FIG. 2b). For this reason, 
it is believed that bivalent pairing is an adaptation 
that stabilizes polyploids74,75. It has been suggested, 
nevertheless, that a transition to bivalent pairing 
is not necessary and that an efficient resolution of 
tetravalents can be achieved by unknown mecha-
nisms that favour a 2:2 segregation12,76. Whatever their 
nature, the mechanisms that are required to normal-
ize autotetraploid meiosis have an important role in 
adaptation because neoautotetraploids frequently 
produce aneuploids. For example, several studies 
found that 30–40% of the progeny of autotetraploid 
maize is aneuploid77–80.
Another type of meiotic crisis arises in triploids and 
pentaploids. These are formed from the union of gam-
etes of different ploidy, such as 1X and 2X. In triploids, 
trivalents cannot be resolved into balanced products, 
and random segregation of multiple chromosome types 
produces mostly aneuploid gametes. Depending on the 
species, aneuploid gametes (or gametophytes) and the 
resulting zygotes vary in viability BOX 3.
Difficulties in meiosis: allotetraploids. The last case of 
meiotic instability considered here involves allotetra-
ploids. The formation of bivalents is a requirement for 
stable meiosis in allotetraploids because intergenomic 
recombination compromises the maintenance of the 
two parental chromosomal complements (FIG. 2). In 
allopolyploids, pairing between homologous chromo-
somes is enforced by genetic mechanisms. In allohexa-
ploid wheat, a gene called pairing homeologous 1 is 
required for the avoidance of homeologous pairing 
Box 1 | Polyploidy and sexuality 
Polyploidy is associated with the formation of APOMICTIC species. In many sexually reproducing plant species, 
apomictic derivatives arise from the action of a few, usually dominant genes, but these derivatives are also 
polyploid116–123. In triploid apomictic species, apomixis might be selected because it allows the organism to bypass the 
triploid block, a sterile condition that results from the difficulty of producing euploid gametes through triploid 
meiosis120,122,124 (but see BOX 3 for examples of fertile triploids). Tetraploids are also often associated with 
apomixis116,125. Polyploidy might be required in the formation of apomictic species because a diploid or aneuploid 
gamete is necessary for the transmission of genes that cause apomixis.
At least three non-mutually exclusive mechanisms have been proposed to account for this property. First, genes 
for apomixis might be linked to recessive lethals126,127. Second, genes for apomixis might be linked to loci that are 
subject to SEGREGATION DISTORTION in haploid (and not diploid) gametes, as was proposed for a dominant gene that 
causes apomixis in Tripsacum dactyloides (gama grass, a relative of maize)128. A distorter locus (for example, a 
recessive lethal) would cause loss of the apomictic gene in haploid gametes. Third, in the case of triploid species, 
genes for apomixis might be located on chromosomes that are inefficient at pairing. If pairing occurs between two 
chromosomes out of a set of three, the one that is left out will either be lost or will segregate with one of the 
previously paired ones, and will never be inherited by a haploid gamete127. The behaviour that leads to segregation 
distortion or to inefficient pairing might result from the tight linkage of apomixis genes to heterochromatic regions, 
such as the large heterochromatic blocks that are present in supernumerary chromosomes129,130. Heterochromatic 
expansion and the interaction of heterochromatin with centromeric proteins can lead to segregation distortion131,132.
Sexuality is believed to be a condition necessary for evolutionary flexibility, and apomictic species have 
been considered to be evolutionary dead ends. Interestingly, however, apomixis is not necessarily terminal 
because apomictic species can revert to sexuality122,123,133. Intermittent apomixis might provide a selective 
advantage by ensuring survival in times when sexual mates are scarce116. Finally, unisexual or asexual 
reproduction (such as the development of embryos from unfertilized eggs) is associated with polyploidy — 
often triploidy — in animals28. Therefore, polyploidy might facilitate the spread of a species by avoiding 
the need for sexual mates.
840 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 
 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
R E V I E W S


--- Page 6 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
Diploid
Chromocentre
Polyploid
Endopolyploid
and is believed to have resulted from an adaptation 
to polyploidy81,82. A related system might exist in 
allotetraploid Brassica species83.
To summarize, aneuploid gametes can be pro-
duced by polyploid meiosis, although their frequency 
varies between species and according to polyploidy 
type. The mitotic and meiotic difficulties discussed 
in the previous sections indicate that there is a causal 
relationship between polyploidy and aneuploidy. 
Eupolyploids produce frequent aneuploids, which in 
turn can produce euploids80,84. The possibility of the 
occurrence of aneuploidy is relevant because it can 
trigger a syndrome of epigenetic and genomic insta-
bility (see below)85,86. Aneuploidy can cause epigenetic 
changes because of the sensitivity of chromatin regu-
latory pathways to the dosage of genes that encode 
regulatory factors54,87.
Regulatory changes in gene expression. Changes in 
gene expression are listed here among the disadvan-
tages of polyploidy, although this interpretation is not 
clear-cut. Changes in regulatory networks and output 
pathways are thought to be deleterious because we 
assume that the parental expression patterns were 
optimized under selection. On the other hand, 
changes in gene expression are likely to contribute to 
heterosis and can provide variation that might allow 
adaptation to novel conditions. On balance, I assume 
that the deleterious effects of regulatory changes are 
greater and therefore list them in this section on dis-
advantages.
There are several possible causes for changes in 
gene expression in polyploids. An increase in the 
copy number of all chromosomes affects all genes 
equally and should result in a uniform increase in 
gene expression. However, it is possible that some 
genes deviate from this assumption because they 
respond to regulating factors that do not change 
proportionally with ploidy. Additionally, polyploidy 
changes the structural relationship between certain 
cellular components and alters the progress of mitosis 
and meiosis, as described above. These effects might 
modify gene expression through reversible regula-
tion or through persistent epigenetic resetting. Here, 
I consider regulatory changes in gene expression 
separately from epigenetic changes (which are cov-
ered in the following section), although the division 
between the two is largely artificial. The possibility of 
Box 2 | Endopolyploidy
Many organisms have some endopolyploid cells, which are defined by having a genome content that is greater than 
the germ line and which usually results from cycles of DNA replication in the absence of mitosis134. Commonly, 
endopolyploidy involves the side-by-side (polytenic) replication of chromosomes, resulting in the centromeric and 
pericentromeric DNA of sister chromatids being associated with a single, distinct heterochromatin region, known 
as the chromocentre (see figure)50,134,135. This results in a structural difference between polyploid and endopolyploid 
cells. For example, endopolyploid nuclei of Arabidopsis thaliana (with both gametic and haploid chromosome 
number equal to five) have the ten chromocentres that are expected in diploidy51. An exception is the tapetum (a 
nutritive tissue in anthers), in which 20 or more chromocentres are visible because polyploidy originates from 
nuclear restitution (nuclear fusion that occurs after telophase136,137).
Diploid, polyploid and endopolyploid nuclei are compared in the figure, which illustrates the chromosomal 
constitution in G2 phase (after replication) of a diploid with two chromosome types (long and short), and of the 
derived autotetraploid and an endopolyploid cell that is derived from the diploid. Both the polyploid and 
endopolyploid cells have a genome content of eight times that in haploids. The centromeric regions and the derived 
chromocentres are represented by ovals.
In endopolyploid cells, the association of centromeric DNA of a chromosome type is often more intimate than 
mere juxtaposition of dsDNA strands: heterochromatin can be underreplicated, resulting in branched structures in 
which many euchromatic arms emanate from a few strands of heterochromatin135,138,139. On the other hand, true 
polyploids (in contrast to endopolyploid cells, which arise during development) have distinct chromocentres for all 
of their chromosomes and therefore provide a different environment for their heterochromatic DNA (see figure). 
Another difference is between the genetic make up of 
polyploid and endopolyploid cells: polyploid cells 
inherit multiple chromosomes and can therefore have 
levels of heterozygosity that are equal to the number of 
chromosomes of a particular type. For example, a 
tetraploid cell can have the genotype A1A2A3A4, 
whereas an endopolyploid cell is confined to the allelic 
diversity that is present in the original zygote. An 
additional difference is that diploids enter 
endopolyploidy only during differentiation but 
maintain diploidy in their meristematic cells (the plant 
equivalent of stem cells), whereas true polyploids are 
polyploid in all their cells. In conclusion, the 
endoreduplicated state of diploid cells is not directly 
equivalent to true polyploidy, although it has some of 
the same effects, such as increased cell size.
NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 
 VOLUME 6 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 841
R E V I E W S


--- Page 7 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
B CHROMOSOMES
Supernumerary chromosomes 
that differ from the normal 
complement by being 
dispensable, often 
heterochromatic and exhibiting 
unusual meiotic behaviour.
ploidy-dependent regulatory changes is best evalu-
ated in autopolyploids because the added hybridity 
of allopolyploids introduces confounding factors that 
are independent of ploidy.
Surprisingly, only a few studies have examined the 
effects of ploidy on gene regulation. The first such 
study measured the mRNA levels per genome for 18 
genes in 1X, 2X, 3X and 4X maize88. Expression of 
most genes increased with ploidy, but some genes 
showed an inverse relationship to ploidy or an unex-
pected deviation in haploid and triploid tissues (here 
defined as the odd-ploidy response). For example, 
sucrose synthase showed the expected expression 
response (that is, directly proportional to genome 
dosage) in 2X and 4X tissues. However, its expression 
was 3 and 6 times higher, respectively, in 1X and 3X 
tissues. Two other genes showed a similar, but less 
extreme trend. So, 3 out of 18 genes displayed an odd-
ploidy response, indicating that ~10% of the genes are 
sensitive to odd-ploidy. 
This finding has considerable implications for 
our understanding of triploidy and aneuploidy, and, 
possibly, for the regulation of haploid stages such as 
gametophytes and gametes. The odd-ploidy effect is 
difficult to explain, yet a similar property is seen in 
B CHROMOSOMES, which affect the host phenotype dif-
ferentially depending on whether their copy number 
is odd or even, with odd numbers having deleterious 
consequences89,90. 
Another study, that focused on Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae and used gene microarrays, measured 
gene regulation in 1X, 2X, 3X and 4X cells91. Ploidy-
dependent regulation was found for 17 genes, of which 
10 were ploidy-induced and 7 were ploidy-repressed. 
However, the odd-ploidy expression pattern that 
was described in maize for sucrose synthase was not 
described. Because the criteria that were set in the yeast 
search emphasized simple direct or inverse relation-
ships between expression and ploidy, they might have 
eliminated from consideration genes whose regulation 
was sensitive to odd-ploidy. It would be interesting to 
re-examine those data for odd-ploidy responses.
A comparison between the proteomes of diploids 
and autopolyploids of Brassica species did not reveal 
any qualitative or quantitative differences92. However, 
the analysis of proteins is typically less sensitive than 
that of mRNA, and changes in low-abundance proteins 
could have been missed.
In summary, the consequences of autopolyploidi-
zation on gene expression have not been sufficiently 
clarified in animals or plants. Consistent with the 
sampling by Guo et al.88, a relatively small fraction of 
plant genes should have readily measureable changes 
in diploid–tetraploid comparisons, and another frac-
tion should respond to odd-ploidy. Similar changes 
might occur in animals. In all these analyses, it will 
be important to compare genotypically matched dip-
loid, triploid and tetraploid individuals and to rule out 
spurious effects, such as random changes caused by 
the destabilizing effects of treatments that are used to 
induce tetraploidy.
Epigenetic instability. The many instances and pos-
sible causes of epigenetic instability in polyploids have 
recently been described93. The epigenetic resetting 
of ploidy-sensitive loci should be, on balance, more 
often deleterious than advantageous, as it is likely to 
perturb the regulatory adaptations that were selected 
in the parents. Here, I compare epigenetic instability 
in autopolyploids and allopolyploids, and consider the 
evidence for different causal contributions in the two 
systems.
Box 3 | Viability of gametes and zygotes arising from autotriploids and autopentaploids
The aneuploid gametes that are generated from autotriploid and autopentaploid plants, and their resulting zygotes, 
vary in viability. For example, triploid hybrid watermelon is bred because it produces seedless fruits whereas Datura 
stramonium (thorn apple) triploids produce some seeds. The progeny of the latter are diploids and near-diploid 
aneuploids, although the meiotic products that are made by the triploids span the whole range of aneuploidy types140–
142. However, the gametophytes and seed of most of these fail at various times during development.
On the other hand, triploids of other species such as spinach143, Chaemerium angustifolium144 and Arabidopsis 
thaliana84,145 can be considerably fertile. This degree of fertility, which is still lower than that displayed by diploids 
and adapted tetraploids, and the ability to produce progeny of different ploidies, give these triploids a potential 
bridge role — that is, to serve as intermediates in the formation of tetraploids, and as gene conduits between diploids 
and tetraploids26. The potential for such roles has been demonstrated in triploids of A. thaliana, which produce 
progeny that range from diploids to tetraploids, although most are aneuploids84,145. Remarkably, the aneuploids are 
also fertile, and by the sixth to eighth selfing generation the progeny consists of 1/3 tetraploids and 2/3 diploids, 
although a minority of aneuploids can still be found84.
It is not known what causes different triploid species to vary in fertility, and also presumably in tolerance to 
aneuploidy. In the A. thaliana example, one of the triploids was produced by crossing a natural diploid accession, Col-0, 
to a natural autotetraploid accession, Wa-1. Polyploidy-dependent selection for Wa-1 alleles was demonstrated at one 
chromosomal region by mapping the triploid progeny84, and it indicated the presence of genetic variation for ploidy 
responses. Variation was also evident in the progeny of different triploids of A. thaliana84. This work shows how 
triploids might function as bridges between ploidy types. In such a role, they mediate the formation of tetraploids from 
diploids or facilitate gene flow between diploids and tetraploids. Interestingly, triploidy can also be a long-term strategy, 
either through the production of asexual progeny BOX 2 or through sexual reproduction in which a specialized meiosis 
produces haploid sperm and diploid eggs (in frogs146), or diploid sperm and haploid eggs (in plants147,148).
842 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 
 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
R E V I E W S


--- Page 8 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
Diploid
Meiosis
Gametes
Autotetraploid
[        ]
Euchromatic 
active allele
Heterochromatic 
silenced allele
Meiosis
ACCESSION 
A strain of a species, usually 
classified from the geographical 
site of isolation. In the 
Arabidopsis genus it is also 
known as an ecotype.
HAPLOTYPE 
Allelic composition over a 
contiguous chromosome 
stretch.
GENOMIC SHOCK
The concomitant and 
widespread misregulation and 
activation of suppressed 
heterochromatic elements, 
leading to genomic 
remodelling.
Epigenetic instability: autopolyploids. In autopoly-
ploids, where instability is likely to be connected 
directly or indirectly to genome doubling, there are 
few instances of documented instability. A remarkable 
example was found when epigenetic effects at a trans-
genic locus were compared between diploid and tetra-
ploid A. thaliana94,95. The transgene (R) was subject to 
silencing in polyploids and the silenced epigenetic state 
(r) was stably inherited in both diploids and tetraploids. 
Nevertheless, whereas a diploid heterozygote (Rr) pro-
duced the expected equal ratios of silenced alleles (r) 
and active alleles (R), a tetraploid heterozygote (RRrr) 
produced gametes that were predominantly r, violating 
the Mendelian rule of allelic segregation (FIG. 4). The data 
are consistent with transmission of the silenced epige-
netic state from the r to the R allele, a phenomenon that 
is reminiscent of paramutation. Although the behaviour 
of this locus indicates an effect of ploidy on chroma-
tin remodelling, it is unclear how widespread related 
phenomena are in autopolyploids and what feature of 
autopolyploidy is responsible for this observation. The 
locus in which the transgene inserted does not display 
any obvious hallmark of epigenetic instability accord-
ing to the sequence of the standard Columbia ACCESSION 
Col-0. However, one cannot rule out the possibility that 
the Zurich accession used in this study has a different 
HAPLOTYPE at this locus. Instability could also have been 
triggered by duplication of the strong 35S promoter 
from cauliflower mosaic virus in the transgene96.
Evidence for epigenetic instability was also provided 
in two other papers. These reported that some, but 
not all, of the genes that were undergoing epigenetic 
regulatory changes in allopolyploids of A. thaliana 
were also likely to display regulatory alterations in the 
autopolyploid parental strain. These changes involved 
the silencing or activation of genes, including the 
activation of a DNA transposon of the Spm/CACTA 
family97,98. However, the generality of these changes 
could not be determined because multiple independent 
autopolyploids were not examined. Therefore, it could 
not be ruled out that autopolyploidization had caused 
a GENOMIC SHOCK that changed the epigenetic regulation 
of random targets. A parallel analysis of DNA methyla-
tion and transcription in diploids and autotetraploids 
might help to identify remodelled loci. However, it 
will be important to examine multiple independent 
autotetraploids to ascertain the commonality and rel-
evance to ploidy of the observed changes.
Epigenetic instability: allopolyploids. Extensive 
evidence for epigenetic remodelling is available in 
allopolyploids, for which structural genomic (see, for 
example, REFS 99,100 and expression changes have been 
reported for many systems. Studies that connect these 
changes to DNA methylation changes (the hallmark 
of epigenetic remodelling in plants) have been done 
in A. thaliana and wheat. These two neoallopoly-
ploids were formed in different ways. In A. thaliana, 
neoallopolyploids were produced by crossing two 
autotetraploid parents, whereas in wheat they were 
produced by crossing diploid parents and duplicating 
the chromosomes of the F1 hybrids. In A. thaliana, 
epigenetically regulated genes were identified by com-
paring the autotetraploid parents to the allopolyploid 
progeny10,97,98,101, whereas in wheat the comparison was 
between the diploid parents, the diploid hybrid and the 
allopolyploid progeny100,102–104. In A. thaliana, genes that 
are altered by epigenetic regulation must respond to the 
transition from autopolyploidy to allopolyploidy, and 
2–2.5% of the genes were estimated to have undergone 
regulatory changes. In wheat, altered genes could have 
responded to both hybridization and polyploidization, 
and a similar number of genes was estimated to have 
undergone regulatory changes. In wheat, changes were 
induced predominantly by hybridization and not by 
polyploidy since the diploid hybrid displayed most 
of the changes that were also observed in the allo-
polyploid. Similar results were found when compar-
ing methylation patterns in the parents, the diploid F1 
hybrids and an allopolyploid of the Spartina genus of 
grass (see below)105. 
The interaction between parental genomes was 
highlighted by a microarray study that examined the 
regulation of 26,000 genes in the Arabidopsis genus 
neoallopolyploids106. This study detected a transcrip-
tome divergence between the progenitors of more than 
15%, due to genes that were highly expressed in A. thal-
iana and not in Arabidopsis arenosa, or vice versa. The 
expression of approximately 5% of the genes diverged 
from the mid-parent value in two independently 
derived synthetic allotetraploids, indicating non-addi-
tive gene regulation after interspecific hybridization. 
Remarkably, most non-additively expressed genes in 
the allotetraploids also differed in expression levels 
between the parents, indicating that divergence in 
Figure 4 | Ploidy-dependent paramutation. Paramutation 
describes allelic interactions in which an epigenetic state is 
transmitted from a suppressed allele to an active allele, 
resulting in Mendelian ratios being biased towards the 
inheritance of loss-of-function, silenced alleles. The figure 
illustrates an epigenetically silenced transgenic locus — 
described by Mittelsten-Scheid et al.94,95 — that has a 
polyploidy-dependent ability to convert an active locus to an 
inactive one. By contrast, the same locus was incapable of 
affecting the active allele in a diploid. The model that these 
authors describe is based on the assumption that the 
conversion from the active to inactive state occurs during 
meiosis. For simplicity only two gamete types are shown for 
the autotetraploid. 
NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 
 VOLUME 6 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 843
R E V I E W S


--- Page 9 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
ENDOSPERM 
A fertilization-derived, triploid 
nutritive tissue that is found in 
the seeds of flowering plants.
regulation contributes to the non-additive response. 
Significantly, more than 65% of the non-additively 
expressed genes in the allotetraploids were repressed, 
and more than 94% of the repressed genes in the 
allotetraploids matched the genes that were expressed 
at higher levels in A. thaliana than in A. arenosa. On 
the basis of previous studies on the same hybrid lines, 
at least some of these changes are likely to be epige-
netically induced10,97. However, it is possible that others 
changes have simpler regulatory causes, such as the 
dominance of negative regulatory elements from A. 
arenosa. Taken together these results indicate that the 
instability syndrome of neoallopolyploids should be 
attributed primarily to parental regulatory divergence 
and intergenomic incompatibilities.
Another possible cause of epigenetic remodelling 
is aneuploidy, which can arise frequently in neopoly-
ploids (see above). Aneuploidy could act in two ways. 
The first is by altering the dosage of factors that are 
encoded by chromosomes that have greater or fewer 
than the expected number of copies. Dosage imbal-
ance of chromatin regulatory factors, for example, 
might alter regulatory patterns of chromosomes87 
and even alter imprinting patterns. The second way in 
which aneuploidy might act is through the exposure 
of unpaired chromatin regions to epigenetic remod-
elling mechanisms. The susceptibility of meiotically 
unpaired DNA to silencing was first reported for 
Neurospora crassa, but it seems to be a general phe-
nomenon107–110. In both cases, once a chromosomal 
region has become imprinted it would be inherited 
stably even when the cause of imprinting is removed. 
Therefore, some of the epigenetic instability that is 
observed in polyploids might result from aneuploidy. 
For example, do pairing phenomena affect the odd-
ploidy responses that are observed in maize haploids 
and triploids88? Notably, the chromosomes in the 
haploid and triploid maize tissue that was used in this 
investigation had not experienced meiosis and could 
not have inherited epigenetic states from the ‘‘meiotic 
silencing of unpaired DNA’’88 (see below).
Evolutionary potential of polyploids
What is the effect of the widespread epigenetic changes 
that are observed in neoallopolypoids on the evolu-
tionary potential of these species? At first sight, the 
epigenetic phenomena seem to be deleterious because 
of their disruptive effects on regulatory patterns that 
are established by selection. However, they might 
instead increase diversity and plasticity, as well as 
increasing heterosis, and therefore contribute to the 
adaptive potential of polyploids2,105. One example of 
rapid and superior adaptation is provided by the wide-
spread dispersal of the invasive, recently formed allo-
polyploid, Spartina anglica, which contrasts with the 
relatively non-invasive nature of the parental species, 
which are presumed to be autopolyploids. However, 
it is not known whether the success of this species 
can be attributed to the fixed heterosis that is derived 
from allopolyploidy or to the increased variability that 
results from epigenetic remodelling.
Another example of the rapid adaptation of 
polyploids to new niches is provided by the study 
of arctic flora. Phylogenetic analyses indicate that 
arctic allopolyploids form frequently and have been 
particularly efficient at invading newly deglaciated 
areas, probably because their genomes confer hybrid 
vigour and buffer against the effects of inbreed-
ing111. Allopolyploidy might also provide selective 
advantages in the context of parasites. For example, 
allopolyploids of the frog Xenopus laevis can arise 
in response to selective pressures from flatworm 
parasites, to which resistance can be gained through 
interspecific hybridization112. 
To take advantage of the adaptive traits that are con-
ferred by allopolyploidy, a fertility barrier must often 
be overcome. Neoallopolyploids of the Arabidopsis 
genus are extremely variable in phenotype, but they 
also have poor fertility10,98. The molecular basis of this 
sterility is unknown. If it has an epigenetic basis, as 
might result from the differential imprinting of genes 
that are expressed in the ENDOSPERM, the outcome of 
altered epigenetic regulation would be deleterious. This 
sterility bottleneck must have been rapidly bypassed to 
produce the fertile and successful natural allopolyploid 
Arabidopsis suecica, whose establishment might have 
been favoured by marked environmental changes that 
are associated with glaciation113. Interestingly, some 
of the epigenetic changes that are seen in the neoallo-
polyploids also occur in the respective natural species97, 
although their effect on phenotype and their adaptive 
potential are unclear.
The epigenetic marking of genes could affect their 
evolutionary potential. An interesting observation in 
cotton shows how rapidly established regulatory changes 
can have a role in long-term evolutionary events that 
involve duplicate genes. By comparing the expression 
of homeologous genes in different tissues, it was found 
that one copy could become silenced in selected tissues, 
resulting in subfunctionalization of the duplicates16,114. It 
is not known whether these changes reflect a preferential 
interaction of normal, cell-specific regulatory factors 
with the cis-regulatory regions of one parent, or whether 
tissue-specific epigenetic regulation that is triggered by 
alloploidy targets one gene preferentially. Regardless of 
the mechanism, uniparental expression in alternate tis-
sue types favours both the maintenance of the duplicates 
as well as additional changes that optimize the function 
of each duplicate gene in selected cell types.
Outlook
Recent studies have provided an interesting insight into 
the regulatory and genomic consequences of polyploidy. 
Together with the emerging evidence of ancestral dupli-
cation through polyploidization in model plant, fungus 
and animal species, knowledge of these consequences 
has stimulated thinking on the relationship between 
early polyploidization events, success of the polyploid, 
and the long-term fate of the new species. Mutation 
is bound to eliminate gene duplicates unless there is 
selection for their maintenance. Such selective pres-
sures include dosage requirements that keep members 
844 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 
 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
R E V I E W S


--- Page 10 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
of protein complexes fixed in their optimal stoichio-
metric ratios87,115, regulatory or epigenetic interactions 
that lead to expression-dependent subfunctionalization, 
and heterotic interactions that affect fitness. All these 
forces act immediately after polyploidization and have 
protracted effects, so elucidating them is important to 
understanding the evolution of polyploids. However, 
we still need to understand the different regulatory 
consequences of autopolyploidy versus allopolyploidy 
and the effect of aneuploidy on polyploids. Finally, we 
need to identify which adaptations might facilitate the 
transition from diploidy to polyploidy. Together, this 
should allow the integration of the diploidy–polyploidy 
cycle into an evolutionary model for eukaryotes.
1.  
Yu, J. et al. The Genomes of Oryza sativa: a history of 
duplications. PLoS Biol. 3, e38 (2005).
2.  
Paterson, A. H. Polyploidy, evolutionary opportunity, and 
crop adaptation. Genetica 123, 191–196 (2005).
3.  
Wong, S., Butler, G. & Wolfe, K. H. Gene order evolution 
and paleopolyploidy in hemiascomycete yeasts. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 99, 9272–9277 (2002).
4.  
Blanc, G. & Wolfe, K. H. Widespread paleopolyploidy in 
model plant species inferred from age distributions of 
duplicate genes. Plant Cell 16, 1667–1678 (2004).
5.  
Becak, M. L. & Kobashi, L. S. Evolution by polyploidy and 
gene regulation in Anura. Genet. Mol. Res. 3, 195–212 
(2004).
6.  
Gu, Z., Cavalcanti, A., Chen, F. C., Bouman, P. & Li, W. H. 
Extent of gene duplication in the genomes of Drosophila, 
nematode, and yeast. Mol. Biol. Evol. 19, 256–262 (2002).
7.  
Christoffels, A. et al. Fugu genome analysis provides 
evidence for a whole-genome duplication early during the 
evolution of ray-finned fishes. Mol. Biol. Evol. 21, 1146–
1151 (2004).
8.  
Van de Peer, Y. & Meyer, A. in The Evolution of the Genome 
(ed. Gregory, T. R.) 330–363 (Elsevier, San Diego, 2005).
9.  
Stebbins, G. L. Chromosomal Evolution in Higher Plants 
(Addison–Wesley, Menlo Park, 1970).
10.  Comai, L. et al. Phenotypic instability and rapid gene 
silencing in newly formed Arabidopsis allotetraploids. Plant 
Cell 12, 1551–1568 (2000).
11.  Mayer, V. W. & Aguilera, A. High levels of chromosome 
instability in polyploids of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mutat. 
Res. 231, 177–186 (1990).
12.  Singh, R. J. Plant Cytogenetics (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
2003).
13.  Ramsey, J. & Schemske, D. W. Neopolyploidy in flowering 
plants. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 33, 589–639 (2002).
14.  Wang, X., Shi, X., Hao, B., Ge, S. & Luo, J. Duplication and 
DNA segmental loss in the rice genome: implications for 
diploidization. New Phytol. 165, 937–946 (2005).
15.  Paterson, A. H., Bowers, J. E. & Chapman, B. A. Ancient 
polyploidization predating divergence of the cereals, and its 
consequences for comparative genomics. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 101, 9903–9908 (2004).
16.  Adams, K. L. & Wendel, J. F. Polyploidy and genome 
evolution in plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 8, 135–141 
(2005).
17.  Taylor, J. S. & Raes, J. in The Evolution of the Genome (ed. 
Gregory, T. R.) 289–327 (Elsevier, San Diego, 2005).
18.  Maere, S. et al. Modeling gene and genome duplications in 
eukaryotes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 5454–5459 
(2005).
19.  Nam, J., Kaufmann, K., Theissen, G. & Nei, M. A simple 
method for predicting the functional differentiation of 
duplicate genes and its application to MIKC-type MADS-
box genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, e12 (2005).
20.  Langkjaer, R. B., Cliften, P. F., Johnston, M. & Piskur, J. 
Yeast genome duplication was followed by asynchronous 
differentiation of duplicated genes. Nature 421, 848–852 
(2003).
21.  Rastogi, S. & Liberles, D. A. Subfunctionalization of 
duplicated genes as a transition state to 
neofunctionalization. BMC Evol. Biol. 5, 28 (2005).
22.  Zhang, Z. & Kishino, H. Genomic background predicts the 
fate of duplicated genes: evidence from the yeast genome. 
Genetics 166, 1995–1999 (2004).
23.  Papp, B., Pal, C. & Hurst, L. D. Metabolic network analysis 
of the causes and evolution of enzyme dispensability in 
yeast. Nature 429, 661–664 (2004).
24.  Langham, R. J. et al. Genomic duplication, fractionation and 
the origin of regulatory novelty. Genetics 166, 935–945 
(2004).
25.  Lynch, M. & Conery, J. S. The origins of genome complexity. 
Science 302, 1401–1404 (2003).
26.  Ramsey, J. & Schemske, D. W. Pathways, mechanisms, 
and rates of polyploid formation in flowering plants. Annu. 
Rev. Ecol. Syst. 29, 467–501 (1998).
27.  Tate, J. A., Soltis, D. E. & Soltis, P. S. in The Evolution of the 
Genome (ed. Gregory, T. R.) 372–414 (Elsevier, San Diego, 
2005).
28.  Gregory, T. R. & Mable, B. K. in The Evolution of the 
Genome (ed. Gregory, T. R.) 428–501 (Elsevier, San Diego, 
2005).
29.  Eiben, B. et al. Cytogenetic analysis of 750 spontaneous 
abortions with the direct-preparation method of chorionic villi 
and its implications for studying genetic causes of pregnancy 
wastage. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47, 656–663 (1990).
30.  Groose, R. W. & Bingham, E. T. Gametophytic heterosis for 
in vitro pollen traits in alfalfa. Crop Sci. 31, 1510–1513 
(1991).
31.  Butruille, D. V. & Boiteux, L. S. Selection–mutation balance 
in polysomic tetraploids: impact of double reduction and 
gametophytic selection on the frequency and 
subchromosomal localization of deleterious mutations. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 97, 6608–6613 (2000).
32.  Song, J. L. & Wessel, G. M. How to make an egg: 
transcriptional regulation in oocytes. Differentiation 73, 1–17 
(2005).
33.  Ostermeier, G. C., Miller, D., Huntriss, J. D., Diamond, M. P. 
& Krawetz, S. A. Reproductive biology: delivering 
spermatozoan RNA to the oocyte. Nature 429, 154 (2004).
34.  Tanaka, H. & Baba, T. Gene expression in spermiogenesis. 
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 62, 344–354 (2005).
35.  Auger, D. L. et al. Nonadditive gene expression in diploid 
and triploid hybrids of maize. Genetics 169, 389–397 
(2005).
36.  Birchler, J. A., Auger, D. L. & Riddle, N. C. In search of the 
molecular basis of heterosis. Plant Cell 15, 2236–2239 
(2003).
37.  Kidwell, K. K., Woodfield, D. R., Bingham, E. T. & Osborn, T. 
C. Relationships among genetic distance, forage yield and 
heterozygosity in isogenic diploid and tetraploid alfalfa 
populations. Theor. Appl. Genet. 89, 323–328 (1994).
38.  Bingham, E. T., Groose, R. W. Complementary gene 
interactions in alfalfa are greater in autotetraploids than 
diploids. Crop Sci. 34, 823–829 (1994).
39.  Yadegari, R. & Drews, G. N. Female gametophyte 
development. Plant Cell. 16, S133–S141 (2004).
40.  McCormick, S. Control of male gametophyte development. 
Plant Cell. 16, S142–S153 (2004).
41.  Mable, B. K. & Otto, S. P. Masking and purging mutations 
following EMS treatment in haploid, diploid and tetraploid 
yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Genet. Res. 77, 9–26 
(2001).
42.  Stadler, I. J. Chromosome number and the mutation rate in 
Avena and Triticum. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 15, 876–881 
(1929).
43.  Moore, R. C. & Purugganan, M. D. The evolutionary 
dynamics of plant duplicate genes. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 8, 
122–128 (2005).
44.  Prince, V. E. & Pickett, F. B. Splitting pairs: the diverging 
fates of duplicated genes. Nature Rev. Genet. 3, 827–837 
(2002).
45.  Miller, J. S. & Venable, D. L. Polyploidy and the evolution of 
gender dimorphism in plants. Science 289, 2335–2338 
(2000).
46.  Nasrallah, M. E., Yogeeswaran, K., Snyder, S. & Nasrallah, 
J. B. Arabidopsis species hybrids in the study of species 
differences and evolution of amphiploidy in plants. Plant 
Physiol. 124, 1605–1614 (2000).
47.  Entani, T. et al. Relationship between polyploidy and pollen 
self-incompatibility phenotype in Petunia hybrida Vilm. 
Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 63, 1882–1888 (1999).
48.  Olmo, E. Nucleotype and cell size in vertebrates: a review. 
Basic Appl. Histochem. 27, 227–256 (1983).
49.  Melaragno, J. E., Mehrotra, B. & Coleman, A. W. 
Relationship between endopolyploidy and cell size in 
epidermal tissue of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 5, 1661–1668 
(1993).
50.  Fransz, P., De Jong, J. H., Lysak, M., Castiglione, M. R. & 
Schubert, I. Interphase chromosomes in Arabidopsis are 
organized as well defined chromocenters from which 
euchromatin loops emanate. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 99, 
14584–14589 (2002).
51.  Jasencakova, Z. et al. Histone modifications in 
Arabidopsis — high methylation of H3 lysine 9 is 
dispensable for constitutive heterochromatin. Plant J. 33, 
471–480 (2003).
52.  Corredor, E., Diez, M., Shepherd, K. & Naranjo, T. The 
positioning of rye homologous chromosomes added to 
wheat through the cell cycle in somatic cells untreated and 
treated with colchicine. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 109, 112–
119 (2005).
53.  Gruenbaum, Y., Margalit, A., Goldman, R. D., Shumaker, D. 
K. & Wilson, K. L. The nuclear lamina comes of age. Nature 
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 6, 21–31 (2005).
54.  Schotta, G., Ebert, A., Dorn, R. & Reuter, G. Position-effect 
variegation and the genetic dissection of chromatin 
regulation in Drosophila. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 14, 67–75 
(2003).
55.  Sebillon, P. et al. Expanding the phenotype of LMNA 
mutations in dilated cardiomyopathy and functional 
consequences of these mutations. J. Med. Genet. 40, 560–
567 (2003).
56.  Blumenthal, S. S., Clark, G. B. & Roux, S. J. Biochemical 
and immunological characterization of pea nuclear 
intermediate filament proteins. Planta 218, 965–975 
(2004).
57.  Rose, A. et al. Genome-wide identification of Arabidopsis 
coiled-coil proteins and establishment of the ARABI-COIL 
database. Plant Physiol. 134, 927–939 (2004).
58.  Cavalier-Smith, T. Nuclear volume control by nucleoskeletal 
DNA, selection for cell volume and cell growth rate, and the 
solution of the DNA C-value paradox. J. Cell Sci. 34, 247–
278 (1978).
59.  Akerlund, T., Nordstrom, K. & Bernander, R. Analysis of cell 
size and DNA content in exponentially growing and 
stationary-phase batch cultures of Escherichia coli. J. 
Bacteriol. 177, 6791–6797 (1995).
This analysis of ploidy and growth conditions in E. coli 
addresses the question of why certain cells become 
endopolypoid; it goes a long way towards 
demonstrating the generality of the connection 
between metabolic activity and DNA content.
60.  Bresler, V., Montgomery, W. L., Fishelson, L. & Pollak, P. E. 
Gigantism in a bacterium, Epulopiscium fishelsoni, 
correlates with complex patterns in arrangement, quantity, 
and segregation of DNA. J. Bacteriol. 180, 5601–5611 
(1998).
61.  Kondorosi, E., Roudier, F. & Gendreau, E. Plant cell-size 
control: growing by ploidy? Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 3, 488–
492 (2000).
62.  Sugimoto-Shirasu, K. & Roberts, K. ‘‘Big it up’’: 
endoreduplication and cell-size control in plants. Curr. Opin. 
Plant Biol. 6, 544–553 (2003).
63.  Triantaphyllou, A. C. & Hirschmann, H. Evidence of direct 
polyploidization in the mitotic parthenogenetic Meloidogyne 
microcephala through doubling of its somatic chromosome 
number. Fundam. Appl. Nematol. 20, 385–391 (1997).
64.  Flemming, A. J., Shen, Z. Z., Cunha, A., Emmons, S. W. & 
Leroi, A. M. Somatic polyploidization and cellular 
proliferation drive body size evolution in nematodes. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 5285–5290 (2000).
65.  Fankhouser, G. Maintenance of normal structure in 
heteroploid salamander larvae, through compensation of 
changes in cell size by adjustment of cell number and cell 
shape. J. Exp. Zool. 100, 445–455 (1945).
66.  Henery, C. C., Bard, J. B. & Kaufman, M. H. Tetraploidy in 
mice, embryonic cell number, and the grain of the 
developmental map. Dev. Biol. 152, 233–241 (1992).
67.  Andreassen, P. R., Lohez, O. D., Lacroix, F. B. & Margolis, 
R. L. Tetraploid state induces p53-dependent arrest of 
nontransformed mammalian cells in G1. Mol. Biol. Cell 12, 
1315–1328 (2001).
68.  Borel, F., Lohez, O. D., Lacroix, F. B. & Margolis, R. L. 
Multiple centrosomes arise from tetraploidy checkpoint 
failure and mitotic centrosome clusters in p53 and RB 
pocket protein-compromised cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 99, 9819–9924 (2002).
This article shows that polyploidy can cause a mitotic 
crisis.
69.  Klinner, U. & Bottcher, F. Mitotically unstable polyploids in 
the yeast Pichia guilliermondii. J. Basic Microbiol. 32, 331–
338 (1992).
70.  Lin, H. et al. Polyploids require Bik1 for kinetochore-
microtubule attachment. J. Cell Biol. 155, 1173–1184. 
(2001).
71.  Chan, J., Calder, G., Fox, S. & Lloyd, C. Localization of the 
microtubule end binding protein EB1 reveals alternative 
pathways of spindle development in Arabidopsis 
suspension cells. Plant Cell 17, 1737–1748 (2005).
72.  Schmit, A. C. Acentrosomal microtubule nucleation in 
higher plants. Int. Rev. Cytol. 220, 257–289 (2002).
NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS 
 VOLUME 6 | NOVEMBER 2005 | 845
R E V I E W S


--- Page 11 ---
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
73.  Risso-Pascotto, C., Pagliarini, M. S. & do Valle, C. B. 
Multiple spindles and cellularization during 
microsporogenesis in an artificially induced tetraploid 
accession of Brachiaria ruziziensis (Gramineae). Plant Cell 
Rep. 23, 522–527 (2005).
74.  Santos, J. L. et al. Partial diploidization of meiosis in 
autotetraploid Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics 165, 1533–
1540 (2003).
75.  Weiss, H. & Maluszynska, J. Chromosomal rearrangement 
in autotetraploid plants of Arabidopsis thaliana. Hereditas 
133, 255–261 (2000).
76.  Mastenbroek, I., deWet, J. M. J. & Lu, C.-Y. Chromosome 
behavior in early and advanced generation of tetraploid 
maize. Caryologia 35, 463–470 (1982).
77.  Doyle, G. G. Aneuploidy and inbreeding depression in 
random mating and self-fertilizing autotetraploid 
populations. Theor. Appl. Genet. 72, 799–806 (1986).
78.  Randolph, L. F. Cytogenetics of tetraploid maize. J. Agric. 
Res. 50, 591–605 (1935).
79.  Muntzing, A. Cytogenetic properties and practical value of 
tetraploid rye. Hereditas 37, 17–84 (1951).
80.  Burnham, C. R. Discussions in Cytogenetics (Burgess, 
Minneapolis, 1962).
81.  Sears, E. R. Genetic control of chromosome pairing in 
wheat. Annu. Rev. Genet. 10, 31–51 (1976).
82.  Prieto, P., Shaw, P. & Moore, G. Homologue recognition 
during meiosis is associated with a change in chromatin 
conformation. Nature Cell Biol. 6, 906–908 (2004).
83.  Jenczewski, E. et al. PrBn, a major gene controlling 
homeologous pairing in oilseed rape (Brassica napus) 
haploids. Genetics 164, 645–653 (2003).
84.  Henry, I. M. et al. Aneuploidy and genetic variation in the 
Arabidopsis thaliana triploid response. Genetics 170, 1979–
1988 (2005).
This paper shows that ploidy can ‘‘segregate as a 
trait’’ in a cross; it also highlights the relationship 
between polyploidy, triploidy and aneuploidy, and the 
effect of genetic background.
85.  Papp, I. et al. Structural instability of a transgene locus in 
tobacco is associated with aneuploidy. Plant J. 10, 469–478 
(1996).
86.  Matzke, M. A., Mette, M. F., Kanno, T. & Matzke, A. J. Does 
the intrinsic instability of aneuploid genomes have a causal 
role in cancer? Trends Genet. 19, 253–256 (2003).
87.  Birchler, J. A., Riddle, N. C., Auger, D. L. & Veitia, R. A. 
Dosage balance in gene regulation: biological implications. 
Trends Genet. 21, 219–226 (2005).
88.  Guo, M., Davis, D. & Birchler, J. A. Dosage effects on gene 
expression in a maize ploidy series. Genetics 142, 1349–
1355 (1996).
89.  Jones, R. N. & Rees, H. Genotypic control of chromosome 
behaviour in rye. XI. The influence of B chromosomes on 
meiosis. Heredity 22, 333–347 (1967).
90.  Camacho, J. P. M. in The Evolution of the Genome (ed. 
Gregory, T. R.) 223–286 (Elsevier, San Diego, 2005).
91.  Galitski, T., Saldanha, A. J., Styles, C. A., Lander, E. S. & 
Fink, G. R. Ploidy regulation of gene expression. Science 
285, 251–254 (1999).
A microarray analysis of the transcriptome in a yeast 
ploidy series.
92.  Albertin, W. et al. Autopolyploidy in cabbage (Brassica 
oleracea L.) does not alter significantly the proteomes of 
green tissues. Proteomics 5, 2131–2139 (2005).
93.  Adams, K. L. & Wendel, J. F. Novel patterns of gene 
expression in polyploid plants. Trends Genet. 21, 539–543 
(2005). 
94.  Mittelsten Scheid, O., Afsar, K. & Paszkowski, J. Formation 
of stable epialleles and their paramutation-like interaction in 
tetraploid Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature Genet. 34, 450–454 
(2003).
95.  Mittelsten Scheid, O., Jakovleva, L., Afsar, K., Maluszynska, 
J. & Paszkowski, J. A change of ploidy can modify 
epigenetic silencing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 7114–
7119 (1996).
A compelling demonstration of epigenetic remodelling 
that is associated with autopolyploidization.
96.  Ye, F. & Signer, E. R. RIGS (repeat-induced gene silencing) 
in Arabidopsis is transcriptional and alters chromatin 
configuration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 10881–10886 
(1996).
97.  Wang, J. et al. Stochastic and epigenetic changes of gene 
expression in Arabidopsis polyploids. Genetics 167, 1961–
1973 (2004).
A good example of the epigenetic instability found in 
neoallopolyploids.
98.  Madlung, A. et al. Genomic changes in synthetic 
Arabidopsis polyploids. Plant J. 41, 221–230 (2005).
99.  Pontes, O. et al. Chromosomal locus rearrangements are a 
rapid response to formation of the allotetraploid Arabidopsis 
suecica genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 18240–
18245 (2004).
100.  Shaked, H., Kashkush, K., Ozkan, H., Feldman, M. & Levy, 
A. A. Sequence elimination and cytosine methylation are 
rapid and reproducible responses of the genome to wide 
hybridization and allopolyploidy in wheat. Plant Cell 13, 
1749–1759 (2001).
101.  Madlung, A. et al. Remodeling of DNA methylation and 
phenotypic and transcriptional changes in synthetic 
Arabidopsis allotetraploids. Plant Physiol. 129, 733–746 
(2002).
This paper reports on the activation of some 
transposable elements in neopolyploids of the 
Arabidopsis genus.
102.  Kashkush, K., Feldman, M. & Levy, A. A. Gene loss, 
silencing and activation in a newly synthesized wheat 
allotetraploid. Genetics 160, 1651–1169 (2002).
103.  He, P., Friebe, B. R., Gill, B. S. & Zhou, J. M. Allopolyploidy 
alters gene expression in the highly stable hexaploid wheat. 
Plant Mol. Biol. 52, 401–414 (2003).
104.  Kashkush, K., Feldman, M. & Levy, A. A. Transcriptional 
activation of retrotransposons alters the expression of 
adjacent genes in wheat. Nature Genet. 33, 102–106 (2003).
This report connects the regulation of repeated 
elements to that of genes in newly formed 
allopolyploids.
105.  Salmon, A., Ainouche, M. L. & Wendel, J. F. Genetic and 
epigenetic consequences of recent hybridization and 
polyploidy in Spartina (Poaceae). Mol. Ecol. 14, 1163–1175 
(2005).
106.  Wang, J. et al. Genome-wide non-additive gene regulation 
in Arabidopsis allotetraploids. Genetics.
The first microarray-based comparison of newly 
formed allopolyploids and their parents.
107.  Bean, C. J., Schaner, C. E. & Kelly, W. G. Meiotic pairing 
and imprinted X chromatin assembly in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Nature Genet. 36, 100–105 (2004).
108.  Baarends, W. M. et al. Silencing of unpaired chromatin and 
histone H2A ubiquitination in mammalian meiosis. Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 25, 1041–1053 (2005).
109.  Turner, J. M. et al. Silencing of unsynapsed meiotic 
chromosomes in the mouse. Nature Genet. 37, 41–47 
(2005).
110.  Shiu, P. K., Raju, N. B., Zickler, D. & Metzenberg, R. L. 
Meiotic silencing by unpaired DNA. Cell 107, 905–916 
(2001).
111.  Brochmann, C. et al. Polyploidy in arctic plants. Biol. J. Linn. 
Soc. 82, 521–536 (2004).
112.  Jackson, J. A. & Tinsley, R. C. Parasite infectivity to 
hybridising host species: a link between hybrid resistance 
and allopolyploid speciation? Int. J. Parasitol. 33, 137–144 
(2003).
113.  Sall, T., Jakobsson, M., Lind-Hallden, C. & Hallden, C. 
Chloroplast DNA indicates a single origin of the 
allotetraploid Arabidopsis suecica. J. Evol. Biol. 16, 
1019–1029 (2003).
114.  Adams, K. L., Percifield, R. & Wendel, J. F. Organ-specific 
silencing of duplicated genes in a newly synthesized cotton 
allotetraploid. Genetics 168, 2217–2226 (2004).
115.  Veitia, R. A. Paralogs in polyploids: one for all and all for 
one? Plant Cell 17, 4–11 (2005).
116.  Bicknell, R. A. & Koltunow, A. M. Understanding apomixis: 
recent advances and remaining conundrums. Plant Cell 16, 
S228–S245 (2004).
117.  Koltunow, A. M. & Grossniklaus, U. Apomixis: a 
developmental perspective. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 54, 547–
574 (2003).
118.  Richards, A. J. Apomixis in flowering plants: an overview. 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 358, 1085–1093 (2003).
119.  Joly, S. & Bruneau, A. Evolution of triploidy in Apios 
americana (Leguminosae) revealed by genealogical analysis 
of the histone H3-D gene. Evolution 58, 284–295 (2004).
120.  van Dijk, P. J. & Bakx-Schotman, J. M. Formation of 
unreduced megaspores (diplospory) in apomictic 
dandelions (Taraxacum officinale, s. l.) is controlled by a sex-
specific dominant locus. Genetics 166, 483–492 (2004).
This is a good example of studies that have shown 
linkage between a dominant apomictic gene and a 
heterochromatic B chromosome.
121.  Yamauchi, A., Hosokawa, A., Nagata, H. & Shimoda, M. 
Triploid bridge and role of parthenogenesis in the evolution 
of autopolyploidy. Am. Nat. 164, 101–112 (2004).
122.  Verduijn, M. H., Van Dijk, P. J. & Van Damme, J. M. The role 
of tetraploids in the sexual-asexual cycle in dandelions 
(Taraxacum). Heredity 93, 390–398 (2004).
123.  Sharbel, T. F., Mitchell-Olds, T., Dobes, C., Kantama, L. & de 
Jong, H. Biogeographic distribution of polyploidy and B 
chromosomes in the apomictic Boechera holboellii 
complex. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 109, 283–292 (2005).
124.  Saura, A., Lokki, J. & Suomalainen, E. Origin of polyploidy in 
parthenogenetic weevils. J. Theor. Biol. 163, 449–456 
(1993).
125.  Quarin, C. L., Espinoza, F., Martinez, E. J., Pessino, S. C. & 
Bovo, O. A. A rise of ploidy level induces the expression of 
apomixis in Paspalum notatum. Sex. Plant Reprod. 13, 
243–249 (2001).
126.  Nogler, G. A. Genetics of apospory in Ranunculus 
auricomus. V. Conclusions. Bot. Helv. 94, 411–422 
(1984).
127.  Noyes, R. D. & Rieseberg, L. H. Two independent loci 
control agamospermy (apomixis) in the triploid flowering 
plant Erigeron annuus. Genetics 155, 379–390 (2000).
128.  Grimanelli, D. et al. Non-Mendelian transmission of apomixis 
in maize–Tripsacum hybrids caused by a transmission ratio 
distortion. Heredity 80, 40–47 (1998).
129.  Manning, J. T. & Dickson, D. P. E. Asexual reproduction, 
polyploidy and optimal mutation rates. J. Theor. Biol. 118, 
485–589 (1986).
130.  Roche, D., Hanna, W. W. & Ozias-Akins, P. Is 
supernumerary chromatin involved in gametophytic 
apomixis of polyploid plants? Sex. Plant Reprod. 13, 343–
349 (2001).
131.  Henikoff, S., Ahmad, K. & Malik, H. S. The centromere 
paradox: stable inheritance with rapidly evolving DNA. 
Science 293, 1098–1102 (2001).
132.  Fishman, L. & Willis, J. H. A novel meiotic drive locus almost 
completely distorts segregation in mimulus (monkeyflower) 
hybrids. Genetics 169, 347–353 (2005).
133.  Sharbel, T. F. & Mitchell-Olds, T. Recurrent polyploid origins 
and chloroplast phylogeography in the Arabis holboellii 
complex (Brassicaceae). Heredity 87, 59–68 (2001).
134.  Larkins, B. A. et al. Investigating the hows and whys of DNA 
endoreduplication. J. Exp. Bot. 52, 183–192 (2001).
135.  Zhimulev, I. F. et al. Polytene chromosomes: 70 years of 
genetic research. Int. Rev. Cytol. 241, 203–275 (2004).
136.  Weiss, H. & Maluszynska, J. Molecular cytogenetic analysis 
of polyploidization in the anther tapetum of diploid and 
autotetraploid Arabidopsis thaliana plants. Ann. Bot. 87, 
729–735 (2001).
137.  Comai, L., Tyagi, A. P. & Lysak, M. A. FISH analysis of 
meiosis in Arabidopsis allopolyploids. Chromosome Res. 
11, 217–226 (2003).
138.  Leach, T. J., Chotkowski, H. L., Wotring, M. G., Dilwith, R. 
L. & Glaser, R. L. Replication of heterochromatin and 
structure of polytene chromosomes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 
6308–6316 (2000).
139.  Makunin, I. V. et al. The Drosophila suppressor of 
underreplication protein binds to late-replicating regions 
of polytene chromosomes. Genetics 160, 1023–1134 
(2002).
140.  Satina, S. & Blakeslee, A. F. Chromosome behavior in 
triploids of Datura stramonium. I. The male gametophyte. 
Am. J. Bot. 24, 519–621 (1938).
141.  Satina, S. & Blakeslee, A. F. Chromosome behavior in 
triploid Datura. II. The female gametophyte. Am. J. Bot. 24, 
621–627 (1938).
142.  Satina, S., Blakeslee, A. F. & Avery, A. G. Chromosome 
behavior in triploid Datura. III. The seed. Am. J. Bot. 24, 
595–602 (1938).
143.  Janick, J. & Stevenson, E. C. The effects of polyploidy on 
sex expression in the spinach. J. Heredity 46, 151–156 
(1955).
144.  Burton, T. L. & Husband, B. C. Fecundity and offspring 
ploidy in matings among diploid, triploid and tetraploid 
Chamerion angustifolium (Onagraceae): consequences for 
tetraploid establishment. Heredity 87, 573–582 (2001).
145.  Steinitz-Sears, L. M. Chromosome studies in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Genetics 48, 483–490 (1963).
146.  Stock, M. et al. A bisexually reproducing all-triploid 
vertebrate. Nature Genet. 30, 325–328 (2002).
A recently discovered example of fixed sexual 
triploidy.
147.  Norrmann, G. A. & Quarin, C. L. Permanent odd polyploidy 
in a grass (Andropogon ternatus). Genome 29, 340–344 
(1987).
148.  Smith-White, S. Polarised segregation in the pollen mother 
cells of a stable triploid. Heredity 2, 119–129 (1948).
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank three anonymous reviewers for their suggestions. 
I also gratefully acknowledge funding by the National Science 
Foundation Plant Genome Program.
Competing interests statement
The author declares no competing financial interests.
 Online links
DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.
fcgi?db=gene
sucrose synthase
Grain Genes: http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/GG2/index.shtml
pairing homeologous 1
Swiss-Prot: http://cn.expasy.org/sprot
p53
FURTHER INFORMATION
Functional Genomics of Plant Polyploids: http://polyploid.
agronomy.wisc.edu/index.html
General polyploidy portal: http://www.polyploidy.org
Luca Comai’s homepage: http://faculty.washington.edu/comai
Access to this interactive links box is free online.
846 | NOVEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 
 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
R E V I E W S
