--- Page 1 ---
mAbs
ISSN: 1942-0862 (Print) 1942-0870 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/kmab20
Evolution of phage display libraries for
therapeutic antibody discovery
Yang Zhang
To cite this article: Yang Zhang (2023) Evolution of phage display libraries for therapeutic
antibody discovery, mAbs, 15:1, 2213793, DOI: 10.1080/19420862.2023.2213793
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/19420862.2023.2213793
© 2023 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 24 May 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 17779
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 66 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kmab20


--- Page 2 ---
REVIEW
Evolution of phage display libraries for therapeutic antibody discovery
Yang Zhang
Consultant for Biopharma Companies, New York, USA
ABSTRACT
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and their derivatives have emerged as one of the most important classes 
of biotherapeutics in recent decades. The success of mAb is due to their high versatility, high target 
specificity, excellent clinical safety profile, and efficacy. Antibody discovery, the most upstream stage of 
the antibody development pipeline, plays a pivotal role in determination of the clinical outcome of an 
mAb product. Phage display technology, originally developed for peptide directed evolution, has been 
extensively applied to discovery of fully human antibodies due to its unprecedented advantages. The 
value of phage display technology has been proven by a number of approved mAbs, including several 
top-selling mAb drugs, derived from the technology. Since antibody phage display was first established 
over 30 years ago, phage display platforms have been developed to generate mAbs targeting difficult-to- 
target antigens and tackle the drawbacks present in in vivo antibody discovery approaches. More 
recently, the new generation of phage display libraries have been optimized for discovery of mAbs 
with ”drug-like” properties. This review will summarize the principles of antibody phage display and 
design of three generations of antibody phage display libraries.
ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 28 November 2022  
Revised 7 May 2023  
Accepted 10 May 2023 
KEYWORDS 
Antibody developability; 
antibody selection; library 
design; phage display; 
therapeutic antibody 
discovery
Introduction
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and their derivatives1 repre­
sent a major class of therapeutics and have become the best- 
selling drugs in United States in recent years.2,3 The global 
mAb market size reached ~$150 billion in 2020 and is expected 
to double in the next five years.2 To date, approved fully 
human therapeutic antibodies were discovered from either 
in vivo animal immunization (including humanized mice 
and convalescent human donors) or in vitro phage display 
technology. For in vivo animal immunization, antibodies are 
generated through repeated immunization of target of interest. 
Antibodies with high affinity and developability are selected 
during the development of immune response. However, this 
process is time intensive and requires the antigen to be immu­
nogenic and nontoxic. In addition, because the selection is 
entirely completed in vivo, there is limited control over prop­
erties, such as specificity and epitope. As the other approach, 
phage display technology has greatly advanced the therapeutic 
mAb discovery process by providing a highly versatile 
approach and overcoming many drawbacks present in 
in vivo antibody generation technologies. Due to the comple­
tely in vitro selection system, phage display surpasses in vivo 
discovery approaches by enabling the discovery of antibodies 
against virtually any targets or epitopes, including those that 
are 
either 
toxic 
or 
nonimmunogenic 
for 
animal 
immunization.4–6 Moreover, due to fully controlled selection 
conditions, phage display can be tailored for selection for 
desired properties that may not be achievable by in vivo 
approaches, 
e.g., 
selection 
for 
a 
specific 
epitope 
recognition,7,8 
pH-dependent 
binding,9,10 
antibody 
internalization,11,12 
and 
even 
catalytic 
activity.13 
Furthermore, phage display libraries have successfully led to 
antibody discovery against the most challenging targets or 
epitopes, e.g., the stem region of influenza hemagglutinin,14 
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),15 and specific confor­
mations of ion channels.16–18 A recently developed new gen­
eration of phage libraries with protein quality control steps in 
the library construction will further close the developability 
gap between antibodies derived in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, 
there is an increasing consideration that development of anti­
body-based affinity reagents and therapeutics should be mov­
ing from animal-based to in vitro approaches due to animal 
protection.19,20
Although the majority of approved therapeutic mAbs were 
discovered through animal immunization to date, the number 
of phage-derived antibodies has increased in the recent years, 
including some of the blockbuster drugs, Humira®, Lucentis®, 
and Tecentriq® (Table 1). As of November of 2022, 17 phage- 
derived mAbs have been granted approvals and a multitude of 
them are actively being evaluated in clinical trials (Table 1).21– 
23 Due to the continuous evolution of the technology, as well as 
the expiration of related key patents,23 more and more phage- 
derived mAbs are anticipated to enter clinical trial and the 
market in the future.
The success of phage display mainly relies on the quality of 
library and the selection (a process also known as “panning”) 
strategy. The two most widely used panning strategies are solid 
phase and liquid phase panning. In solid phase panning, the 
target is immobilized on a microtiter plate where specific 
phage binders are captured. By elution and propagation in 
CONTACT Yang Zhang 
Yzhang_2016@outlook.com 
Consultant for Biopharma Companies, New York, USA
This article has been corrected with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
MABS                                                           
2023, VOL. 15, NO. 1, 2213793 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19420862.2023.2213793
© 2023 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits 
unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow the 
posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.


--- Page 3 ---
the E.coli host cells, specific phage hits are amplified. After 
iterative panning cycles, target-specific phages are enriched 
(Figure 1).24,25 In liquid phase panning, biotin-labeled targets 
are incubated with the antibody phage libraries and briefly 
pulled down by streptavidin-coated magnetic beads to capture 
bound phage.26,27 Epitope-directed antibody selection can be 
achieved by alternative panning strategies or incorporating 
other technologies, e.g., competitive panning7,28–30 and site- 
specific photocrosslinking.8 Some other panning strategies, 
such as cell-based and nanodisc-based panning, have been 
developed for challenging targets, e.g., multi-spanning mem­
brane proteins.31–33 Moreover, functional selection can be 
directly integrated in the selection process.34,35 Although var­
ious panning strategies have been developed to meet different 
antibody discovery goals, the selection procedures are gener­
ally well-established and standardized.36 However, library 
design is highly variable and plays a central role in phage 
display-based antibody discovery. In this review, we will briefly 
summarize the principle of antibody phage display and phage 
engineering. This review will focus on the design principles of 
three generations of phage display libraries, as well as several 
specially designed libraries.
Phage display
Display of foreign peptide on the bacteriophage surface with­
out affecting phage infection was first described by George 
P. Smith in 1985.37 Since then, phage display technology has 
been extensively applied to various applications, e.g., protein 
evolution (also known as directed evolution), epitope 
determination, identification of enzyme substrates, and drug 
discovery.38 Since phenotype and genotype are physically 
linked in a phage display system, protein variants with desired 
properties can be rapidly selected through panning and the 
genetic information can be readily extracted. In a phage dis­
play system, a library in which diversified peptide or protein 
variants are displayed on phage surface is constructed (typi­
cally 1010 − 1012 diversity). Variants with favored properties 
are enriched during iterative selection cycles. Unique 
sequences can then be screened for further applications. 
While the success of phage display has been demonstrated in 
a wide variety of areas, this review will focus on its application 
in therapeutic antibody discovery.
Antibody phage display was originally developed in three 
institutes: Institute of Cell and Tumor Biology at German 
Cancer Research Center (Germany),39 MRC Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology (United Kingdom),40,41 and Scripps 
Research Institute (United States).42,43 Since then, various 
antibody fragment formats have been commonly used for 
phage display, such as single chain variable fragment 
(scFv),44,45 antigen binding fragment (Fab),24,46 single-domain 
antibody (VHH),47,48 and bispecific antibody fragment.49–51 
Although display of full-length IgG on phage was also 
reported,52,53 this platform was not widely used, likely due to 
unstable display, low display level, and bias on phage propaga­
tion, which resulted in limited functional diversity of the 
library. However, strategies for functional screening in full- 
length IgG format after phage panning have been reported, 
e.g., dual host vector,54 donor-acceptor system,55 high- 
throughput reformatting, and mammalian expression of  
Table 1. Approved mAbs derived from phage display technology.
Generic Name
Product 
Name
Company
Format
Target
First 
Indication
Approved 
Year
Phage display technology
Adalimumab
Humira
Abbvie
IgG1
TNFα
RA
2002
Humanization
Ranibizumab
Lucentis
Novartis, Roche/Genentech
Fab- 
IgG1
VEGFA
nAMD
2006
Humanization, affinity 
maturation
Belimumab
Benlysta
Human genome Sciences (HGS), 
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK)
IgG1
BLyS
SLE
2011
Initial discovery
Raxibacumab
ABThrax
HGS, GSK
IgG1
Bacillus 
anthracis PA
Anthrax
2012
Initial discovery
Ramucirumab
Cyramza
Lilly/Imclone
IgG1
VEGFR2
GC, NSCLC
2014
Initial discovery
Necitumumab
Portrazza
Eli Lilly
IgG1
EGFR
NSLCC
2015
Initial discovery
Ixekizumab
Taltz
Eli Lilly
IgG4
IL-17a
Psoriasis
2016
Humanization
Atezolizumab
Tencentriq
Roche/Genentech
IgG1
PD-L1
UC
2016
Initial discovery
Avelumab
Bavencio
Merck Serono/Pfizer
IgG1
PD-L1
MCC
2017
Initial discovery
Guselkumab
Tremfya
Morphosys, Janssen,
IgG1
IL-23
Psoriasis
2017
Initial discovery
Lanadelumab
Takhzyro
Dyax, Shire
IgG1
pKal
HAE
2018
Initial discovery
Caplacizumab
Cablivi
Ablynx
VHH
vWF
aTTP
2018
Initial discovery
Moxetumomab 
pasudotox
Lumoxiti
AstraZeneca/Medimmune
dsFv- 
PE38
CD22
HCL
2018
Affinity maturation
Emapalumab
Gamifant
Novimmune
IgG1
INFγ
HLH
2018
Initial discovery
Inebilizumab
Uplizna
AstraZeneca/Medimmune, Viela Bio
IgG1
CD19
NMOSD
2020
Affinity maturation
Tralokinumab
Adbry
AstraZeneca/Medimmune, Leo Pharma
IgG4
IL-13
Asthma
2021
Initial discovery
Faricimab
Vabysmo
Roche
Bi-Fab
VEGFA, Ang2
nAMD, DME
2022
Initial discovery and affinity 
maturation
Abbreviations: Ang2: angiopoietin 2; aTTP: acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura; Bacillus anthracis PA: Bacillus anthracis protective antigen; Bi-Fab: 
bispecific Fab; BLyS: B-lymphocyte stimulator; DME: diabetic macular edema; EGFR: epidermal growth factor receptor; GC: gastric carcinoma; HAE: hereditary 
angioedema; HCL: hairy cell leukemia; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IFN: interferon-gamma; IL-13: interleukin-13; IL-17A: interleukin-17A; IL-23: 
interleukin-23; MCC: Merkel cell carcinoma; nAMD: neovascular age-related macular degeneration; NMOSD: neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder; NSCLC: non- 
small cell lung carcinoma; PD-L1: programmed death-1 ligand-1; PE38: Pseudomonas exotoxin A; pKal: plasma kallikrein; RA: rheumatoid arthritis; SLE: systemic lupus 
erythematosus; TNFα: tumor necrosis factor-alpha; UC: urothelial carcinoma; VEGFA: vascular endothelial growth factor A; VEGFR2: vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor 2; vWF: von Willebrand factor.
2
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 4 ---
phage-derived antibodies.56,57 Nevertheless, the display of full- 
length antibody can be readily achieved by eukaryotic display 
platforms, such as yeast and mammalian cell display.58–60 
Choice of display format depends on the final format that 
will be used in the application. Since reformatting sometimes 
causes substantial changes of antibody properties, e.g., affinity 
and stability, keeping format consistent from library to final 
product is considered a ”rule of thumb.” As such, phage dis­
play offers a highly versatile platform with regards to choice of 
antibody format.
Among several well-characterized filamentous bacterio­
phages (Ff), including f1, M13, and fd, M13 is the most widely 
used for phage display. Ff bacteriophages infect E. coli host 
cells through a specific interaction between host F pilus and 
phage minor coat protein pIII.61,62 The Ff phage genome 
encodes 11 proteins, five of which are coat proteins (pIII, 
pVI, pVII, pVIII, and pIX). Although all five coat proteins 
have been demonstrated for protein display,63,64 pIII is the 
most widely used as an antibody fusion partner in phage dis­
play platforms, because it can accommodate large proteins 
with minimal interference on phage function and is 
compatible with monovalent phage display.65,66 Antibody- 
pIII fusion is generally achieved through genetic fusion, but 
can also be achieved through other conjugation approaches, 
such as leucine zipper dimerization,67 synthetic Fc-binding ZZ 
domains,52,68 etc.
In the early display system, the peptide of interest was fused 
to pIII in frame in the phage genome.69,70 Thus, the peptide is 
displayed on all copies of pIII on the phage surface, which 
results in a potential decrease in phage infectivity. Also, the 
size of the peptide that can be efficiently displayed is limited to 
12 amino acids.71 In a phagemid-based system, antibody-pIII 
fusion is encoded in a separate plasmid (designated phagemid) 
and coinfection with a helper phage is required to provide all 
proteins for phage proliferation.66,72,73 As a result, each phage 
particle contains both wild type and antibody-fusion pIII pro­
teins. A key advantage of this system is that monoclonal dis­
play can be achieved, which facilitates selection of high affinity 
clones by avoiding the avidity effect during panning.63,66 
Meanwhile, phage infectivity is maximally retained due to 
the presence of wild type pIII. One drawback of the system is 
that wild type pIII is more efficiently assembled in the phage 
Figure 1. Types of antibody phage display libraries (upper left panel), library construction (lower left panel) and antibody selection (right panel). According to source of 
diversity, antibody phage display libraries can be categorized into three types: natural library, synthetic library, and semisynthetic library. In a typical phagemid system, 
variable regions of light and heavy chains, either cloned from a natural immunoglobulin repertoire or designed and synthesized in vitro, are cloned into a phage display 
vector (phagemid), with one of the chains genetically fused to pIII of phage for display. The library pool is then transformed to E.Coli host cells. By infection with helper 
phage, which provides all the components for phage production, a phage library is generated. Taking solid-phase panning as an example, the phage library is 
incubated with immobilized antigen. After washing, nonspecific phages are removed and antigen-specific phages stay with the antigen. The bound phages are then 
dissociated from the antigen by diverse methods, e.g., low-Ph elution, enzymatic cleavage. Lastly, eluted phages are subjected to propagation in E.Coli host cells. After 
iterative rounds of panning, antigen-specific clones are enriched. Typically, output phages from middle and late rounds of panning are subjected to sequencing and 
binding characterization for obtaining both sequence diversity and high affinity, respectively. Alt-text: Three types of antibody phage display libraries, including 
natural, synthetic, and semisynthetic libraries. Construction of an antibody phage library includes generation of antibody variable region fragments, cloning, 
transformation, and phage production. The antibody selection includes antigen immobilization, phage binding, washing, elution, and phage propagation.
MABS
3


--- Page 5 ---
particle, resulting in only a small percentage (<10%) of anti­
body-displaying phage particles in the population.74 As 
a consequence, either panning efficiency or sensitivity of any 
phage-mediated binding assays can be greatly compromised 
due to excessive wild type phage background. One strategy is 
to increase multiplicity of display, which can be achieved by 
different methods, such as the pVIII/pVII display system,75,76 
the adapter-directed display,77 and using an inducible promo­
ter for the antibody-pIII fusion gene. To maximize the display 
valency, hyperphage was developed by generating a helper 
phage featuring a pIII gene-deficient genotype and wild type 
infectivity phenotype in a pIII-supplying E. coli host.78,79 
Thereby, application of the hyperphage in a regular phagemid 
system resulted in production of phage particles that exclu­
sively display antibody-pIII fusion protein. This not only sub­
stantially increased the sensitivity of phage ELISA, but also 
significantly improved the panning efficiency.
The pIII protein is comprised of N1 and N2 domains 
required for phage infection and a C-terminal domain (CT) 
for pIII assembly. In another effort, a mutant helper phage, 
named CT helper phage, was generated by deletion of N1 and 
N2 domains in the genome. Similar to the hyperphage system, 
the infectivity of CT helper phage was restored by propagation 
in a E. coli host that heterogeneously expresses an intact pIII 
gene. Therefore, use of CT helper phage substantially 
improved the panning efficiency since only phages incorpo­
rated with antibody-pIII fusion are infective.80 Some other 
pIII-deficient helper phage systems were also reported, e.g., 
ex-phage,81 phaberge,82 and a helper phage engineered with 
low N1 expression.71 Of note, since these variants of helper 
phage adopt multivalent display, they result in either reduction 
in phage production or decrease in phage infectivity. 
Therefore, they may not be ideal for phage library construc­
tion. In order to balance display level and phage functionality, 
XP5 helper phage was developed to reduce WT pIII produc­
tion by introducing multiple rare codons in the pIII gene and 
an altered ribosome binding site spacing.83
Three generations of antibody phage display libraries
Universal antibody phage display libraries, typically consisting 
of over ten billion unique sequences, have become a valuable 
source for discovery of mAbs against any types of targets. 
According to the source of diversity, antibody phage libraries 
can be divided into natural, fully synthetic, and semisynthetic 
libraries (Figure 1). In a natural library, diversity is derived 
entirely from natural repertoires, which can be either healthy, 
autoimmune, or immunized donors (named naïve, nonimmu­
nized, and immunized libraries, respectively). In theory, a large 
naïve library can be used to isolate antibodies against any 
targets, but, if a library is constructed from immunized donors, 
diversity will be highly biased toward a specific target. For an 
immunized library constructed from human repertoires, it can 
be constructed from either vaccinated donors or donors who 
have recovered from infection or disease. In a fully synthetic 
library, the antibody frameworks are usually chosen from 
human antibody germlines that are well-represented and 
have shown superior developability. Complementarity-deter­
mining regions (CDRs) are designed based on antibody 
structure and application purpose. The quality of the synthetic 
DNA that are used to create CDR diversity plays a pivotal role 
in determining the functional size of a synthetic library. By 
using mono- or trinucleotide phosphoramidites (TRIM tech­
nology) as building blocks,84,85 diversified CDRs can be 
synthesized in a high-throughput manner, such as array- 
based oligonucleotide synthesis and Slonomics.86,87 In the 
TRIM technology, each amino acid is encoded by a defined 
codon. Therefore, amino acid distribution at the desired posi­
tion can be precisely defined. Moreover, because the codon for 
each amino acid is selected for optimal antibody expression, 
the functional library size is increased. In the natural antibody 
repertoire, the diversity of CDRs, except CDRH3, is 
a collection of defined sequences that exhibit canonical struc­
tures. Compared with the traditional column-based DNA 
synthesis approaches in which one single gene is produced 
per column, the high-throughput DNA synthesis technologies 
allow parallel synthesis of a large number of predetermined 
sequences in the same footprint on a silicon-based chip.88,89 
This enables not only removal of liability motifs that impact 
developability, but also precise mimic of the natural antibody 
diversity. Semisynthetic libraries, therefore, combine synthetic 
CDRs (typically three light chain CDRs and heavy chain CDR1 
and CDR2) and heavy chain CDR3 from natural repertoires. 
Phage libraries can be designed for either antibody discovery 
or engineering. The design of the latter is based on one par­
ental antibody and tailored for one specific target. This review 
will focus on design of three generations of universal antibody 
phage display libraries for antibody discovery (Table 2).
First-generation library
Generation of a universal antibody phage library and its success­
ful application for panning was first described in 1989.42 The 
Fab library containing 2.5 × 107 plaque-forming units (PFUs) 
was constructed by amplification of variable regions of light and 
heavy chains from the mouse antibody repertoire. Soon after, an 
immunized scFv phage library was created using a similar 
procedure.41 Despite the small library size (2×105), the hit rate 
was substantially improved (>90% after two rounds of panning). 
The success of natural libraries for in vitro antibody discovery 
has been proven at different institutions.103–106 A common fea­
ture of these natural libraries is that light and heavy chains are 
randomly combined, thus these are designated combinatorial 
library. Due to the heavy and light chain rearrangement, the 
library diversity is dramatically increased. For example, if 
a natural antibody repertoire contains a diversity of 106 (i.e., 
106 unique light and heavy chain pairs), the diversity would be 
1012 after full light and heavy chain recombination. One signifi­
cant advantage is that this approach generates specificities that 
do not exist in natural repertoire, which enables discovery of 
antibodies targeting any given antigen, including self-antigens.­
107 In contrast, self-antigen targeting can be challenging for 
natively paired antibodies due to immune tolerance (a protec­
tion mechanism in which immune system does not respond to 
self-antigen).108,109 In addition, a large naïve library comprises 
most of the germline genes, which further increases the struc­
tural complexity of the library due to diverse framework struc­
tures. Although the germline gene distribution in a naïve library 
4
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 6 ---
Table 2. Selected examples of three generations of antibody phage display libraries.
Library Name (year)
Organization
Format
Library Type
Framework
Library Size
Key Feature
Highest 
affinity 
(nM) 
(format)a
Reference
First generation 
library
N/A (1996)
Cambridge Antibody 
Technology
ScFv
Naïve
Naïve
1.4 × 1010
●Repertoires from 43 healthy donors
4.2 (scFv)
90
N/A (1994)
MRC Centre for Protein 
Engineering
Fab
Synthetic
49 VH frameworks; 
26 Vκ frameworks; 
21 Vλ frameworks
6.5 × 1010
●Fully randomized CDR3
●Heavy and light chains assembled using combi­
natorial infection
7 (Fab)
91
HAL (2015)
Technical University of 
Braunschweig
ScFv
Naïve
Naïve
1.5 × 1010
●Repertoires from 98 healthy donors
●Optimized Myc/His tag
●Improved antibody production by removal of C- 
terminal phenylalanine of Vκ light chain
0.9 (IgG)
92,110
CAT2.0 (2009)
MedImmune
ScFv
Naïve
Naïve
1.29 × 1011
●Repertoires from 160 healthy donors
N/A
93
n-CoDeR (2000)
BioInvent
ScFv
Naïve
Single VH framework; 
single VL frameworks
2 × 109
●Rearranged 6 CDR segments from natural reper­
toire in single light and heavy chain frameworks
0.9 
(scFv)b
94
Second generation 
library
ETH2-GOLD (2005)
ETH Zurich
ScFv
Synthetic
Single VH framework; 2  
VL frameworks
3 × 109
●Fully randomized CDR3
●CDR diversity concentrated in the center of anti­
gen binding region
23.6 
(scFv)
95
PHILODiam ond 
(2014)
ETH Zurich
ScFv
Synthetic
Single VH framework; 2  
VL frameworks
4 × 1010
●Introduction of S52N in heavy chain CDR2
27 (scFv)
96
Dyax (2005)
Dyax
Fab
Semisynthetic Single VH framework; 
naïve VL frameworks
3.5 × 1010 
(FAB-310) 
1.0 × 1010 
(FAB-410)
●Randomization of selected antigen-contacting 
residues in heavy chain CDR1 and CDR2
●Diversity of light chain and CDRH3 derived from 
autoimmune donors
0.22 
(Fab)c
97
HuCAL- GOLD (2008)
MorphoSys
Fab
Synthetic
7 VH framework; 
4 Vκ frameworks; 
3 Vλ frameworks
1.6 × 1010
●Natural amino acid distribution of six CDRs by 
using trinucleotide mixtures
●Elimination of frame-shifted clones by β-lacta­
mase system
●Antibody and pIII linked by disulfide bond
0.04 (Fab)
98
HuCAL- PLATINUM 
(2011)
MorphoSys
Fab
Synthetic
7 VH framework; 
3 Vκ frameworks; 
3 Vλ frameworks
4.5 × 1010
●Removal of post-translational modification hot 
spots
●Loop length dependent amino acid distribution 
in CDRH3
●Optimized sequence for high expression in both 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
0.002 
(Fab)d
99
Ylanthia (2013)
MorphoSys
Fab
Synthetic
21 VH/Vκ pairs; 15 VH/ 
Vλ pairs
1.3 × 1011
●Selected VH/VL framework pairs with optimal 
biophysical properties
●CDRH3 length and amino acid composition 
based on JH4 and JH6 sequences
●CDR optimized to be devoid of PTM motifs
●Optimized sequence for high expression in both 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
0.7 (Fab)
100
(Continued)
MABS
5


--- Page 7 ---
Table 2. (Continued).
Library Name (year)
Organization
Format
Library Type
Framework
Library Size
Key Feature
Highest 
affinity 
(nM) 
(format)a
Reference
Third generation 
library
ALTHEA  
Gold libraries (2019)
GlobalBio
ScFv
Semisynthetic Single VH framework; 2  
VL frameworks
2.5 × 1010
●Natural CDRH3 from 200 donors
●Removal of developability liability residues
●Enhanced stability by heat shock and protein 
A recovery during library construction
3.3 (scFv)
101
N/A (2021)
Specifica
ScFv
Semisynthetic 4 VH framework; 
3 Vκ frameworks; 
1 Vλ frameworks
9 × 109
●Selection of clinically validated VH/VL pairs as 
library scaffolds
●Synthetic CDRs except CDRH3 from replicated 
natural diversity. Natural CDRH3 sequences 
amplified from 10 donors
●Removal 
of 
CDR 
sequence 
liabilities 
informatically
●Comprehensively 
improved 
developability, 
including affinity, polyspecificity, stability, 
aggregation, expression and display level by 
yeast display filtration
0.034 
(IgG)
102
Abbreviations: HC, heavy chain; LC, light chain; VH, heavy chain variable region; VL, light chain variable region; Vκ, kappa light chain variable region; Vλ, lambda light chain variable region. 
a. Affinity was measured by SPR unless specified 
b. Affinity was measured by ELISA. 
c. Method was not specified. 
d. Affinity was measured by solution equilibrium titration. 
by combining donor-derived and synthetic
6
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 8 ---
is usually consistent with that in natural repertoire, it has been 
observed that germline gene usage post-selection is biased 
toward certain families,93,110 e.g., VH1–69, VH1–46 (Kabat 
nomenclature) and/or IGHV3–30 (IMGT nomenclature) for 
heavy chain. For the light chain, Vλ1-c, Vλ2-2a (Kabat nomen­
clature) and/or IGLV1–47, IGKV1–12, IGKV1-D33 (IMGT 
nomenclature) were enriched after selection. Meanwhile, several 
synthetic and semisynthetic antibody libraries were generated in 
the early 1990s.111–113 Although only antibodies with low affi­
nity (micromolar range) were isolated due to the small library 
size (107-108), these libraries demonstrated that artificial anti­
bodies can be generated in vitro. Later studies showed that, by 
generating larger naïve libraries with library size of 1010-1012, 
antibodies with low- to sub-nanomolar affinity can be directly 
isolated.90,91,93,114–118 Of note, the large naïve library and related 
phage display technology developed by Cambridge Antibody 
Technology has led to approval of six mAbs: adalimumab,119 
belimumab,120 
moxetumomab 
pasudotox,121,122 
raxibacumab,123 
emapalumab,124 
and 
tralokinumab.125 
Another example is the n-CoDeR library in which heavy and 
light chain CDR segments were separately amplified by using 
primers specific to VH3–23 and VL1–47 germlines. The six 
CDRs were then reassembled in a single light and heavy chain 
framework that is well-presented in human repertoire and well- 
expressed in bacterial host cells.94 This strategy overcomes the 
drawback with conventional naïve antibody phage libraries in 
which part of the diversity might be lost due to low expression 
and/or display level of certain germline genes in prokaryotic 
system. The n-CoDeR library was used to discover five mAbs 
and their derivatives that entered clinical trials.126–130 In our 
experience, high hit rate (>90%) can be readily achieved and 
antibodies with high affinity (low nanomolar) can be routinely 
isolated from a large naïve library (library size = 1012) con­
structed in-house. Depending on the target, 10–20% of total 
sequences screened are unique.
Taken together, first-generation phage libraries demon­
strated that antibody discovery can be performed completely 
in vitro and antibodies with high affinity and sequence diver­
sity can be isolated directly from phage libraries.
Second-generation library
In the design of the second-generation libraries, represented by 
several semisynthetic and fully synthetic libraries, amino acid 
distribution and positions to be diversified were carefully 
selected based on knowledge of natural antibody structure 
and antibody–antigen interaction. By leveraging TRIM tech­
nology which uses pre-synthesized trinucleotides as building 
blocks for oligonucleotides synthesis, the CDR amino acid 
composition can be precisely tailored to meet specific design 
criteria. Moreover, developability was taken into consideration 
in the library design.
In the design of several synthetic libraries, e.g., HelL-11, 
HelL-13, and Library F, amino acids that are frequently used in 
the antibody-antigen interaction dominate in CDRL3 and 
CDRH3.131,132 More precisely, in the design of ETH2 and 
ETH-2-Gold libraries, selected residues predicted to be in 
direct contact with the antigen in silico were randomized, 
while structure-supporting CDR residues were kept 
constant.133,134 Based on ETH-2-Gold library, PHILO and 
PHILODiamond libraries were designed to cover a broader 
epitope landscape by incorporation of hydrophilic residues at 
specific positions in the antigen contacting site.96,135 ETH 
serial libraries led to two mAbs, Teleukin and Dekavil, being 
investigated in clinical trials.136–140 Although CDRL3 and 
CDRH3 play crucial roles in germline diversity, it has been 
observed that CDR1 and CDR2 are preferentially selected for 
affinity 
maturation 
during 
the 
course 
of 
somatic 
hypermutation.141–143 In the design of the Dyax library, 
a semisynthetic library, diversity of light chain and CDRH3 
were derived from antibody repertoires of autoimmune donors 
to increase the likelihood of discovery of antibodies targeting 
self-antigens. CDRH1 and CDRH2, however, were fully syn­
thetic, and residues that were predicted to be surface-exposed 
were randomized using all amino acids except cysteine.97 
Indeed, by panning against four selected antigens, the average 
antibody affinities indicated by KD were below 20 nM for three 
of the four targets. Of note, the moderate average affinity (131  
nM) of the other one target is likely due to usage of a single 
VH/VL framework pair in the library construction. The Dyax 
library was used in the discovery of four approved mAbs: 
ramucirumab,144 
necitumumab,145 
avelumab,146 
and 
lanadelumab.147 In a systematic analysis of antibody-protein 
and antibody-peptide interaction propensity, machine learn­
ing was leveraged to predict CDR hot spot residue 
distributions.148 By densely enriching the hot spot residues 
across all CDRs, GH libraries resulted in enhanced antibody– 
antigen recognition indicated by high affinity and specificity. 
In fact, by using minimalist libraries, it has been demonstrated 
that only a small subset of amino acid types (a four-amino-acid 
code (Tyr, Asp, Ser, and Ala) or a binary code (Tyr and Ser)) is 
sufficient to mediate interactions with proteins.149,150
In the HuCAL serial libraries, frameworks that cover major 
types of CDR canonical structures were included to maximize 
structural diversity. By leveraging TRIM technology, six CDRs 
were designed to precisely mimic the amino acid distribution 
that occurs in natural repertoire.98,99,151 Thus, the HuCAL 
libraries are more likely to yield antibodies with nature-like 
properties. Since TRIM technology allows precisely defined 
nucleotide composition in the oligonucleotide synthesis, it 
also enables stable and high expression of antibody in E.coli 
host cells through optimized codon usage and avoidance of 
stop codons, which are the drawbacks of using degenerate 
codons. As a result, functional diversity of the synthetic library 
can be greatly improved. It is notable that the percentage of 
alanine at heavy chain H137 can be tuned to favor binding for 
either protein or hapten/peptide. Another feature of the 
HuCAL library is that restriction sites were introduced to 
flank all six CDR loops. Thus, antibody engineering can be 
facilitated by rapid CDR shuffling. In the design of the 
HuCAL-PLATINUM library, post-translational modification 
hot spots, e.g., N-glycosylation, were avoided in CDR design to 
further improve the antibody’s developability. Moreover, 
amino acid distribution in CDRH3 was tuned based on the 
loop length to further mimic the natural repertoire.99 In 
another effort to further improve the overall developability of 
antibodies selected from a phage library, 36 of 400 VH/VL pairs 
were identified for optimal biophysical properties and used for 
MABS
7


--- Page 9 ---
construction of the Ylanthia library.100 As a result, antibodies 
directly selected from the library showed superior affinity, 
protein expression level, thermal stability, and aggregation 
propensity. Of note, the HuCAL-GOLD library yielded guselk­
umab, which was approved in 2017.152
In summary, in the design of the second-generation 
libraries, antibody structure and developability properties 
were taken into consideration through the removal of 
sequence liability motifs, inclusion of natural amino acid dis­
tributions in CDR, and selection of heavy and light chain 
frameworks with superior biophysical properties.
Third-generation library
In general, the improvements of developability properties in 
the second-generation libraries were achieved by sequence- 
based optimization. While our knowledge regarding 
sequence-based prediction of protein liabilities is still limited, 
many biophysical properties, such as stability, solubility, and 
expression, are closely related to higher order structure of 
a protein. Although scaffolds with high stability and expres­
sion can be selected for library construction, the overall bio­
physical properties of antibodies in a phage library are also 
highly determined by CDR sequence. Therefore, these devel­
opability properties were experimentally improved during 
construction of the third-generation libraries.
In order to enhance the library solubility and thermostabil­
ity, a heat shock step, followed by a protein A recovery, was 
incorporated in the construction of the semisynthetic 
ALTHEA Gold library.101 This is based on the observation 
that heat denaturation selected stable and well-folded 
antibodies.153 Validation of the library showed that the overall 
frequency of hydrophobic residues at diversified CDR posi­
tions decreased after heat shock and protein A selection. In 
contrast, charged residues were positively selected by the fil­
tration process. By panning the library against a diverse panel 
of antigens, the scFvs selected exhibited high affinity (KD 
ranges from single-digit nM to sub-nM), solubility (>50 mg/ 
L), and thermal stability (Tm > 70°C), which agree with bio­
physical parameters of therapeutic antibodies.101,154,155
In another effort to create a semisynthetic phage library 
with ”drug-like” properties, a yeast display filtration was 
applied to select sequences with optimal developability proper­
ties required for clinical development, including affinity, 
aggregation, thermostability, polyspecificity, and expression 
level.102 This step leverages the eukaryotic protein quality 
control systems for selection of correctly behaving proteins 
for secretion.156–158 In detail, five single-CDR yeast display 
libraries, in each of which one CDR (except CDRH3) was 
synthesized from replicated natural diversity, were individu­
ally created. The antibody sequences that were displayed cor­
rectly and in a high level were selected and subjected to next- 
generation sequencing (NGS) analysis. CDRH3 sequences, 
however, were sourced from human natural antibody reper­
toires. This was done for two reasons: 1) depending on length 
and amino acid usage, synthetic CDRH3 diversity typically far 
exceeds the actual library size; and 2) the natural CDRH3 
source can provide enough high diversity and the sequences 
have also been filtered in vivo for optimal biophysical 
properties, e.g., high stability and expression, low immuno­
genicity. To validate the library, panning was conducted 
against four antigens. Remarkably, from a total number of 81 
antibodies isolated, around 80% showed single-digit to sub- 
nM affinity. More strikingly, by determining developability 
parameters, including thermostability, polyspecificity, and 
self-interaction, 97% of the measurements of the antibodies 
behaved similarly or better than that of the corresponding 
approved parental antibodies. This study highlights the impor­
tance of the eukaryotic quality control system in the selection 
of high-quality antibodies.
In summary, the third-generation libraries leverage in vitro 
or in vivo experimental approaches to further improve the 
overall library quality, which yield antibodies with properties 
comparable to therapeutic antibody drugs.
Library designed for specific applications
Although the aforementioned universal phage libraries pro­
vide valuable resources for antibody discovery, their perfor­
mance may be compromised for challenging targets and 
epitopes (e.g., GPCR, concave-shaped epitope) and specific 
applications (e.g., pH-dependent antibodies). This is due to 
inherent characteristics of conventional antibody libraries, 
either natural libraries or synthetic libraries that mimic the 
human antibody repertoire. An advantage of phage display 
technology is that the library can be tailored to adapt to dis­
tinct applications. Indeed, several specialized phage libraries 
have been designed and created.
GPCR library
GPCR represents a class of seven transmembrane receptors. 
GPCRs have been recognized as successful drug targets as 
approximately one third of the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)-approved drugs target GPCRs.159,160 
However, due to high hydrophobicity, conformational flexibil­
ity, and limited accessibility of epitopes on the extracellular 
portion, GPCRs are challenging targets for antibodies. To date, 
there are only two FDA-approved antibodies drugs targeting 
GPCRs: mogamulizumab and erenumab, which target CC 
chemokine receptor 4 and calcitonin gene-related peptide 
receptor, respectively.161 Phage display offers a valuable anti­
body discovery platform for targeting challenging targets, 
including ion channels, transporters, and GPCRs.162 For 
example, one synthetic antibody phage display library was 
designed by mining the sequences of all known GPCR ligand 
interactions and incorporating the identified binding motifs 
into CDRH3. As a result, this GPCR-focused library success­
fully led to discovery of a panel of antagonistic antibodies 
targeting glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor with high affinity.15
Library for selection of pH dependent antibodies
Elimination of soluble targets by conventional high affinity 
antibodies usually requires a large dose. This is because an 
antibody usually binds with an antigen with similar strength 
at both neutral and slightly acidic pH (pH 5.5–6.0); therefore 
the antigen bound with antibody in the extracellular 
8
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 10 ---
environment does not dissociate from the complex in the 
endosome. As a result, the antigen can escape from lysoso­
mal degradation and return to the circulation mediated by 
the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn).163,164 Thus, antibodies that 
are capable of neutralizing the target at physiological pH and 
releasing it at acidic endosomal pH would be expected to 
enhance the therapeutic index. In the past, pH-dependent 
binding has been achieved through antibody engineering, 
e.g., histidine scanning.165,166 Alternatively, sweeping anti­
body technology was developed to enhance binding with 
FcRn at neutral pH for rapid uptake of antibody–antigen 
complex for target clearance.167 While these technologies 
proved successful, they are labor-intensive and all based on 
preexisting antibodies. In another attempt, pH-dependent 
antibodies were isolated de novo from a synthetic antibody 
phage display library.9 In the library design, histidine residue 
was enriched in CDRH3 for two reasons. First, histidine is 
neutrally charged at physiological pH but becomes positively 
charged at pH 6.0. Therefore, histidine residues within the 
protein–protein interaction region can exert pH-dependent 
binding. Second, histidine is less frequently found in natural 
repertoires.168 Combined with a modified selection strategy, 
several anti-CXCL10 antibodies with high binding affinity 
and strong neutralizing activity at pH 7.4, but weak binding 
at pH 6.0 were isolated.
Library with elongated CDRH3
One limitation of human or mouse antibodies is that tar­
geting a concave epitope of a target, e.g., pore of ion 
channels and pocket of enzymes, can be challenging. This 
is largely due to the relatively short CDRH3 length, typi­
cally 7–12 and 8–20 amino acids for mouse and human 
respectively, which tend to form a cave or flat 
paratope.169,170 Therefore, concave-shaped conformation 
of a target is usually inaccessible for conventional antibo­
dies. Although antihuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
broadly neutralizing antibodies with extended CDRH3 of 
around 30 amino acids have been isolated, they were only 
found in a minority of infected population and require 
years of development.171,172 Interestingly, antibodies from 
some species, such as cow and camelid, are unusual in 
having a natural elongated CDRH3 (e.g., up to 70 amino 
acids for cow), which provides extra diversity and paratope 
complexity.173,174 The cow ultralong CDRH3 generally 
adopts a ”stalk and knob” structure, in which a β strand 
”stalk” supports a structurally complex ”knob” domain 
stabilized with multiple disulfide bonds.175 The ”knob” 
domain protrudes out from the antibody surface, making 
it accessible to the concave epitope. In a proof-of-concept 
study, a synthetic Fab phage display library carrying elon­
gated CDRH3 (23–27 amino acids) was constructed.176 By 
panning against the library, a number of antibodies that 
potently inhibited matrix metalloproteinase-14 were identi­
fied. Of note, one of the antibodies was indicated to bind 
to the vicinity of the enzyme activity pocket. Libraries 
displaying atypical antibodies with elongated CDRH3 
further extend the application of phage display technology.
Conclusions and prospects
Phage display has proven to be an unequivocal success for 
antibody discovery, evidenced by 17 approved mAbs and an 
increasing number of phage-derived antibodies under clinical 
investigation. As an entirely in vitro technology, phage display 
not only compensates for many limitations inherited by in vivo 
antibody discovery approaches, it also provides a highly versa­
tile and customizable platform that continuously evolves to 
meet distinct development goals.
Affinity is a key factor used to evaluate the quality of 
a phage library. It has been observed that affinity that can 
be achieved is correlated with the library size. We investi­
gated the correlation between highest affinity values obtained 
from published universal phage libraries and library size 
(data not shown). In agreement with previous observations, 
there is a positive correlation between the two parameters. 
This is because a universal library is designed for antibody 
discovery against any given target. Therefore, a larger library 
(higher diversity) offers a greater chance of identifying high 
affinity antibodies. In the case of a synthetic library, although 
a limited number of frameworks are used, the designed CDR 
diversity usually far exceeds the natural CDR diversity. 
Therefore, the chance to obtain high affinity antibodies 
mainly depends on CDR sequence diversity. In the case of 
a naïve library, the library diversity comes from not only the 
sequence diversity, but also from light and heavy chain rear­
rangement. Of note, the random heavy and light chain rear­
rangement is a process highly resembling chain shuffling, 
which is a routine strategy for in vitro antibody affinity 
maturation. This may explain why antibodies with very 
high affinity were isolated from naïve phage libraries, even 
when the libraries were constructed from germline sequences 
with no or very limited somatic hypermutations. While it was 
expected that identification of library size is a key factor that 
determines the affinity, a correlation with either library type 
or library generation was not observed (data not shown). One 
reason is that, except for a few early libraries, the library size 
difference among three generations of phage libraries is mini­
mal. Also, the advancements of three generations of phage 
libraries mainly reflects improvements of overall developabil­
ity properties.
It has been reported that the presence of library clones that 
do not display antibody fragments (bald phage) is partially due 
to stop codons or frameshifts present in the antibody gene. 
These clones often outgrow because of the decreased burden 
on production of antibody fusion proteins and higher infectiv­
ity due to all wild type pIII molecules on phage particle, 
resulting in loss of library diversity. In efforts to increase 
functional library size, several strategies have been developed. 
For example, anti-tag antibody was used for proofreading 
panning to select in-frame sequences due to the tag being in- 
frame with the antibody sequence.177 In the design of the 
MABS
9


--- Page 11 ---
HuCAL GOLD library, the β-lactamase gene was used to 
eliminate frame-shifted sequences.98
Regarding framework usage in a phage display library, it is 
generally accepted that a library using multiple frameworks 
will perform better than one using a single pair of frameworks, 
since multiple scaffolds provide more structural diversity.100 
For selection of framework, parameters, such as frequency in 
natural repertories, stability, expression, and display level, have 
been taken into consideration. Moreover, it should be noted 
that several heavy chain germline genes, e.g., certain IGVH4 
family genes, have been found to be deselected during phage 
panning.93,98 Also, VH4–34 has been found to be associated 
with B cell cytotoxicity.178 Thus, these germlines should be 
excluded from the library design. For the majority of the phage 
display libraries, VH and VL are randomly rearranged, which 
agrees with the observation that there is no obvious preference 
of VH/VL pairing in natural repertories.179 However, in terms 
of drug development, since different VH/VL pairings do exhibit 
very distinct biophysical characteristics,100,180 attention should 
be given to the choice of framework pairing.
Compared to in vivo antibody discovery approaches, 
another advantage of phage display is that the sequence infor­
mation can be retrieved rapidly and readily. However, this 
advantage is partially attenuated by the conventional screening 
approach of characterization of individual clones, in which 
only a small percentage of sequence information, i.e., the 
most abundant sequences, from panning output is assessed. 
This is partially due to intrinsic amplification bias of antibody- 
displaying phages in E.coli host cells, which leads to some of 
the sequences becoming rare over several cycles of 
panning.181,182 To overcome the limitation, NGS, which allows 
deep mining of sequence space in a sample, has recently been 
applied to antibody phage display technology, especially for 
identification of those rare sequences with potential interesting 
features.183,184 Most recently, machine learning combined with 
NGS has been applied to predict binding features (e.g., affinity, 
epitope, developability) of sequences from phage panning, and 
even generate new sequences with improved properties.185,186
Despite many advantages of phage display, developability 
has been a concern for mAbs derived in vitro due to lack of 
in vivo protein quality control process.187–189 As aforemen­
tioned, either in vitro or eukaryotic quality control steps were 
integrated into the construction of the third-generation phage 
display libraries. Thus, only library members with favorable 
developability were selected. Indeed, it has been reported that 
mAbs selected from the third-generation libraries showed 
overall enhanced developability properties, including high affi­
nity, improved stability and solubility, and less self-interaction. 
Alternatively, mammalian display can be used to further 
screen or optimize developability properties of mAbs, based 
on a strong correlation between optimal biophysical properties 
and display level.190 It is worthwhile to mention that the 
emergence of in vivo delivery of nucleic acid-encoded biolo­
gics, i.e., DNA and mRNA technologies, enables direct pro­
duction of therapeutic mAbs in vivo. These delivery 
technologies bypass the complex protein manufacturing, sto­
rage, and transport processes, which require proteins with 
excellent biophysical properties.191,192 Therefore, it would be 
envisioned that, with the advancements of new drug delivery 
technologies, many requirements on developability, particu­
larly manufacturability, can be mitigated in the future.
As phage display technology continues to evolve, and in 
concert with other state-of-the-art technologies, such as NGS 
and machine learning, phage display technology will continue 
to make great contributions to innovative drug discovery in 
the future.
Abbreviations
Ang2 
angiopoietin 2
aTTP
acquired thrombotic thrombocytope­
nic purpura
Bacillus anthracis PA 
Bacillus anthracis protective antigen
Bi-Fab 
bispecific Fab
BLyS 
B-lymphocyte stimulator
CDR 
complementarity-determining region
DME 
diabetic macular edema
EGFR 
epidermal growth factor receptor
Fab 
antigen binding fragment
FcRn 
neonatal Fc receptor
FDA 
US Food and Drug Administration
GC 
gastric carcinoma
GPCR 
G-protein-coupled receptor
HAE 
hereditary angioedema
HC 
heavy chain
HCL 
hairy cell leukemia
HIV 
human immunodeficiency virus
HLH 
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
IFN 
interferon-gamma
IL-13 
interleukin-13
IL-17A 
interleukin-17A
IL-23 
interleukin-23
LC 
light chain
mAbs 
monoclonal antibodies
MCC 
Merkel cell carcinoma
nAMD 
neovascular 
age-related 
macular 
degeneration
NGS 
next-generation sequencing
NMOSD 
neuromyelitis 
optica 
spectrum 
disorder
NSCLC 
non-small cell lung carcinoma
PD-L1 
programmed death-1 ligand-1
PE38 
Pseudomonas exotoxin A
PFU 
plaque-forming unit
pKal 
plasma kallikrein
RA 
rheumatoid arthritis
scFv 
single chain variable fragment
SLE 
systemic lupus erythematosus
SPR 
surface plasmon resonance
TNFα 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha
TRIM 
trinucleotide mutagenesis
UC 
urothelial carcinoma
VEGFA 
vascular endothelial growth factor A
VEGFR2 
vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor 2
VH 
heavy chain variable region
VHH 
single-domain antibody
Vκ 
kappa light chain variable region
10
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 12 ---
Vλ 
lambda light chain variable region
VL 
light chain variable region
vWF 
von Willebrand factor
Acknowledgments
The author gratefully acknowledges Frederic Fellouse (Abtech 
Therapeutics SAS, Marseille, France) who kindly proofread the manu­
script and provided his insights, as well as useful comments and sugges­
tions. The author also thanks Peter Meinke and Nora Kostow (Tri- 
Institutional Therapeutics Discovery Institute, New York, United States) 
for providing helpful comments.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Funding
The author(s) reported there is no funding associated with the work 
featured in this article.
References
1. Zhu Y, Wang SS, Zhou ZS, Ho M. The emergence of 
AntibodyPlus: the future trend of antibody-based therapeutics. 
Antib Ther. 2022;5:280–87. PMID: 36299417. doi:10.1093/abt/ 
tbac024
2. Lu RM, Hwang YC, Liu IJ, Lee CC, Tsai HZ, Li HJ, Wu HC. 
Development of therapeutic antibodies for the treatment of 
diseases. J Biomed Sci. 2020;27:1. PMID: 31894001. doi:10.1186/ 
s12929-019-0592-z
3. Strohl WR. Current progress in innovative engineered antibodies. 
Protein Cell. 2018;9:86–120. PMID: 28822103. doi:10.1007/ 
s13238-017-0457-8
4. Roth KDR, Wenzel EV, Ruschig M, Steinke S, Langreder N, 
Heine PA, Schneider KT, Ballmann R, Fuhner V, Kuhn P, et al. 
Developing recombinant antibodies by phage display against 
infectious diseases and toxins for diagnostics and therapy. Front 
Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021;11:697876. PMID: 34307196. doi:10. 
3389/fcimb.2021.697876.
5. Nagano K, Tsutsumi Y. Phage display technology as a powerful 
platform for antibody drug discovery. Viruses. 2021;13(2):178. 
PMID: 33504115. doi:10.3390/v13020178.
6. Zhang Y, Su J, Wu DH. Chaptor 10. Physiology and pathology of 
multidrug-resistant bacteria: antibodies- and vaccines-based 
pathogen-specific targeting. In: Nima Rezaei, editor. Physiology 
and pathology of immunology. chaptor 10. physiology and pathol­
ogy of multidrug-resistant bacteria: antibodies- and vaccines- 
based pathogen-specific Targeting. London, United Kingdom: 
Intech Open; 2017. p. 34.
7. Parsons HL, Earnshaw JC, Wilton J, Johnson KS, Schueler PA, 
Mahoney W, McCafferty J. Directing phage selections towards 
specific epitopes. Protein Eng. 1996;9(11):1043–49. PMID: 
8961357. doi:10.1093/protein/9.11.1043.
8. Chen L, Zhu C, Guo H, Li R, Zhang L, Xing Z, Song Y, Zhang Z, 
Wang F, Liu X, et al. Epitope-directed antibody selection by 
site-specific photocrosslinking. Sci Adv. 2020;6(14):eaaz7825. 
PMID: 32270046. doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaz7825.
9. Bonvin P, Venet S, Fontaine G, Ravn U, Gueneau F, Kosco- 
Vilbois M, Proudfoot AE, Fischer N. De Novo isolation of anti­
bodies 
with 
Ph-dependent 
binding 
properties. 
MAbs. 
2015;7:294–302. PMID: 25608219. doi:10.1080/19420862.2015. 
1006993
10. Murtaugh ML, Fanning SW, Sharma TM, Terry AM, Horn JR. 
A combinatorial histidine scanning library approach to engineer 
highly 
Ph-dependent 
protein 
switches. 
Protein 
Sci. 
2011;20:1619–31. PMID: 21766385. doi:10.1002/pro.696
11. Poul MA, Becerril B, Nielsen UB, Morisson P, Marks JD. Selection 
of tumor-specific internalizing human antibodies from phage 
libraries. J Mol Biol. 2000;301:1149–61. PMID: 10966812. doi:10. 
1006/jmbi.2000.4026
12. Becerril B, Poul MA, Marks JD. Toward selection of internalizing 
antibodies from phage libraries. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 
1999;255:386–93. PMID: 10049718. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1999.0177
13. Janda KD, Lo CH, Li T, Barbas CF 3rd, Wirsching P, Lerner RA. 
Direct selection for a catalytic mechanism from combinatorial 
antibody libraries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994;91:2532–36. 
PMID: 8146149. doi:10.1073/pnas.91.7.2532
14. Tung CP, Chen IC, Yu CM, Peng HP, Jian JW, Ma SH, Lee YC, 
Jan JT, Yang AS. Discovering neutralizing antibodies targeting the 
stem epitope of H1N1 influenza hemagglutinin with synthetic 
phage-displayed antibody libraries. null. 2015;5:15053. PMID: 
26456860. doi:10.1038/srep15053
15. Liu Q, Garg P, Hasdemir B, Wang L, Tuscano E, Sever E, Keane E, 
Hernandez AGL, Yuan TZ, Kwan E, et al. Functional GLP-1R 
antibodies identified from a synthetic GPCR-focused library 
demonstrate 
potent 
blood 
glucose 
control. 
MAbs. 
2021;13:1893425. PMID: 33706686. doi:10.1080/19420862.2021. 
1893425.
16. Dominik PK, Borowska MT, Dalmas O, Kim SS, Perozo E, 
Keenan RJ, Kossiakoff AA. Conformational chaperones for struc­
tural studies of membrane proteins using antibody phage display 
with nanodiscs. Structure. 2016;24:300–09. PMID: 26749445. 
doi:10.1016/j.str.2015.11.014
17. Qiang M, Dong X, Zha Z, Zuo XK, Song XL, Zhao L, Yuan C, 
Huang C, Tao P, Hu Q, et al. Selection of an ASIC1a-blocking 
combinatorial antibody that protects cells from ischemic death. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018;115:E7469–77. PMID: 30042215. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1807233115.
18. Williams WA, Linley JE, Jones CA, Shibata Y, Snijder A, Button J, 
Hatcher JP, Huang L, Taddese B, Thornton P, et al. Antibodies 
binding the head domain of P2X4 inhibit channel function and 
reverse neuropathic pain. Pain. 2019;160(9):1989–2003. PMID: 
31045747. doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001587.
19. Gray AC, Bradbury A, Dubel S, Knappik A, Pluckthun A, 
Borrebaeck CAK. Reproducibility: bypass animals for antibody 
production. Nature. 2020;581:262. PMID: 32415238. doi:10.1038/ 
d41586-020-01474-7
20. Gorovits B, Hays A, Jani D, Jones C, King C, Lundequist A, Mora J, 
Partridge M, Pathania D, Ramaswamy SS, et al. AAPS perspective 
on the EURL recommendation on the use of non-animal-derived 
antibodies. Aaps J. 2021;23(2):34. PMID: 33649990. doi:10.1208/ 
s12248-021-00567-z.
21. Alfaleh MA, Alsaab HO, Mahmoud AB, Alkayyal AA, Jones ML, 
Mahler SM, Hashem AM. Phage display derived monoclonal anti­
bodies: from bench to bedside. Front Immunol. 2020;11:1986. 
PMID: 32983137. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.01986
22. Valldorf B, Hinz SC, Russo G, Pekar L, Mohr L, Klemm J, 
Doerner A, Krah S, Hust M, Zielonka S. Antibody display tech­
nologies: selecting the cream of the crop. Biol Chem. 2021;403(5– 
6):455–77. PMID: 33759431. doi:10.1515/hsz-2020-0377.
23. Frenzel A, Schirrmann T, Hust M. Phage display-derived human 
antibodies in clinical development and therapy. MAbs. 
2016;8:1177–94. PMID: 27416017. doi:10.1080/19420862.2016. 
1212149
24. Kang AS, Barbas CF, Janda KD, Benkovic SJ, Lerner RA. Linkage 
of recognition and replication functions by assembling combina­
torial antibody Fab libraries along phage surfaces. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 1991;88:4363–66. PMID: 1903540. doi:10.1073/pnas.88. 
10.4363
25. Sidhu SS, Lowman HB, Cunningham BC, Wells JA. Phage display 
for selection of novel binding peptides. Methods Enzymol. 
2000;328:333–63. PMID: 11075354. doi:10.1016/s0076-6879(00) 
28406-1
MABS
11


--- Page 13 ---
26. Hawkins RE, Russell SJ, Winter G. Selection of phage antibodies by 
binding affinity. Mimicking affinity maturation. J Mol Biol. 
1992;226(3):889–96. PMID: 1507232. doi:10.1016/0022-2836(92) 
90639-2.
27. Schutte M, Thullier P, Pelat T, Wezler X, Rosenstock P, Hinz D, 
Kirsch MI, Hasenberg M, Frank R, Schirrmann T, et al. 
Identification of a putative Crf splice variant and generation of 
recombinant antibodies for the specific detection of Aspergillus 
fumigatus. PLos One. 2009;4(8):e6625. PMID: 19675673. doi:10. 
1371/journal.pone.0006625.
28. Zeng X, Li L, Lin J, Li X, Liu B, Kong Y, Zeng S, Du J, Xiao H, 
Zhang T, et al. Isolation of a human monoclonal antibody specific 
for the receptor binding domain of SARS-CoV-2 using 
a competitive phage biopanning strategy. Antib Ther. 2020;3 
(2):95–100. PMID: 33912790. doi:10.1093/abt/tbaa008.
29. Eisenhardt SU, Schwarz M, Bassler N, Peter K. Subtractive 
single-chain 
antibody 
(scFv) 
phage-display: 
tailoring 
phage-display for high specificity against function-specific confor­
mations of cell membrane molecules. Nat Protoc. 2007;2 
(12):3063–73. PMID: 18079705. doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.455.
30. Ditzel HJ, Binley JM, Moore JP, Sodroski J, Sullivan N, Sawyer LS, 
Hendry RM, Yang WP, Barbas CF 3rd, Burton DR, et al. 
Neutralizing recombinant human antibodies to a conformational 
V2- and CD4-binding site-sensitive epitope of HIV-1 gp120 iso­
lated by using an epitope-masking procedure. J Immunol. 
1995;154(2):893–906. PMID: 7529290. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov/pubmed/7529290 .
31. Jones ML, Alfaleh MA, Kumble S, Zhang S, Osborne GW, Yeh M, 
Arora N, Hou JJ, Howard CB, Chin DY, et al. Targeting membrane 
proteins for antibody discovery using phage display. null. 2016;6 
(1):26240. PMID: 27189586. doi:10.1038/srep26240.
32. Dominik PK, Kossiakoff AA. Phage display selections for affi­
nity reagents to membrane proteins in nanodiscs. Methods 
Enzymol. 2015;557:219–45. PMID: 25950967. doi:10.1016/bs. 
mie.2014.12.032
33. Alfaleh MA, Jones ML, Howard CB, Mahler SM. Strategies for 
selecting membrane protein-specific antibodies using phage dis­
play with cell-based panning. Antibodies (Basel). 2017;6(3):10. 
PMID: 31548525. doi:10.3390/antib6030010.
34. Zhang H, Wilson IA, Lerner RA. Selection of antibodies that 
regulate phenotype from intracellular combinatorial antibody 
libraries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109(39):15728–33. 
PMID: 23019357. doi:10.1073/pnas.1214275109.
35. Merkouris S, Barde YA, Binley KE, Allen ND, Stepanov AV, 
Wu NC, Grande G, Lin CW, Li M, Nan X, et al. Fully human 
agonist antibodies to TrkB using autocrine cell-based selection 
from a combinatorial antibody library. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2018;115(30):E7023–32. PMID: 29987039. doi:10.1073/pnas. 
1806660115.
36. Ledsgaard L, Ljungars A, Rimbault C, Sorensen CV, Tulika T, 
Wade J, Wouters Y, McCafferty J, Laustsen AH. Advances in 
antibody phage display technology. Drug Discov Today. 2022;27 
(8):2151–69. PMID: 35550436. doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2022.05.002.
37. Smith GP. Filamentous fusion phage: novel expression vectors that 
display cloned antigens on the virion surface. Science. 
1985;228:1315–17. PMID: 4001944. doi:10.1126/science.4001944
38. Smith GP, Petrenko VA. Phage Display. Chem Rev. 
1997;97:391–410. PMID: 11848876. doi:10.1021/cr960065d
39. Breitling F, Dubel S, Seehaus T, Klewinghaus I, Little M. A surface 
expression vector for antibody screening. Gene. 1991;104:147–53. 
PMID: 1916287. doi:10.1016/0378-1119(91)90244-6
40. McCafferty J, Griffiths AD, Winter G, Chiswell DJ. Phage anti­
bodies: filamentous phage displaying antibody variable domains. 
Nature. 1990;348:552–54. PMID: 2247164. doi:10.1038/348552a0
41. Clackson T, Hoogenboom HR, Griffiths AD, Winter G. Making 
antibody fragments using phage display libraries. Nature. 
1991;352:624–28. PMID: 1907718. doi:10.1038/352624a0
42. Huse WD, Sastry L, Iverson SA, Kang AS, Alting-Mees M, 
Burton DR, Benkovic SJ, Lerner RA. Generation of a large combi­
natorial library of the immunoglobulin repertoire in phage 
lambda. Science. 1989;246:1275–81. PMID: 2531466. doi:10.1126/ 
science.2531466
43. Barbas CF 3rd, Kang AS, Lerner RA, Benkovic SJ. Assembly of 
combinatorial antibody libraries on phage surfaces: the gene III 
site. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991;88:7978–82. PMID: 1896445. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.88.18.7978
44. Marks JD, Griffiths AD, Malmqvist M, Clackson TP, Bye JM, 
Winter G. By-passing immunization: building high affinity 
human antibodies by chain shuffling. Biotechnology (N Y). 
1992;10:779–83. PMID: 1368267. doi:10.1038/nbt0792-779
45. Noronha EJ, Wang X, Desai SA, Kageshita T, Ferrone S. Limited 
diversity of human scFv fragments isolated by panning a synthetic 
phage-display scFv library with cultured human melanoma cells. 
J Immunol. 1998;161:2968–76. PMID: 9743360 https://www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9743360 .
46. Hoogenboom HR, Griffiths AD, Johnson KS, Chiswell DJ, 
Hudson P, Winter G. Multi-subunit proteins on the surface of 
filamentous phage: methodologies for displaying antibody (Fab) 
heavy and light chains. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991;19:4133–37. 
PMID: 1908075. doi:10.1093/nar/19.15.4133
47. Arbabi Ghahroudi M, Desmyter A, Wyns L, Hamers R, 
Muyldermans S. Selection and identification of single domain 
antibody fragments from camel heavy-chain antibodies. FEBS 
Lett. 1997;414:521–26. PMID: 9323027. doi:10.1016/s0014- 
5793(97)01062-4
48. Yan J, Li G, Hu Y, Ou W, Wan Y. Construction of a synthetic 
phage-displayed Nanobody library with CDR3 regions rando­
mized by trinucleotide cassettes for diagnostic applications. 
J Transl Med. 2014;12:343. PMID: 25496223. doi:10.1186/s12967- 
014-0343-6
49. Beckmann R, Jensen K, Fenn S, Speck J, Krause K, Meier A, 
Roth M, Fauser S, Kimbung R, Logan DT, et al. DutaFabs are 
engineered therapeutic Fab fragments that can bind two targets 
simultaneously. Nat Commun. 2021;12:708. PMID: 33514724. 
doi:10.1038/s41467-021-20949-3.
50. McGuinness BT, Walter G, FitzGerald K, Schuler P, Mahoney W, 
Duncan AR, Hoogenboom HR. Phage diabody repertoires for 
selection of large numbers of bispecific antibody fragments. Nat 
Biotechnol. 1996;14:1149–54. PMID: 9631069. doi:10.1038/ 
nbt0996-1149
51. Fagete S, Botas-Perez L, Rossito-Borlat I, Adea K, Gueneau F, 
Ravn U, Rousseau F, Kosco-Vilbois M, Fischer N, Hartley O. 
Dual display: phage selection driven by co-engagement of two 
targets by two different antibody fragments. Protein Eng Des Sel. 
2017;30:575–82. PMID: 28444391. doi:10.1093/protein/gzx021
52. Mazor Y, Van Blarcom T, Carroll S, Georgiou G. Selection of 
full-length IgGs by tandem display on filamentous phage particles 
and Escherichia coli fluorescence-activated cell sorting screening. 
FEBS J. 2010;277:2291–303. PMID: 20423457. doi:10.1111/j.1742- 
4658.2010.07645.x
53. Zhang L, Cong Y, Li H, Chen L, Li B, Huang JX, Dong J. 
Construction of a full-length antibody phage display vector. 
J Immunol Methods. 2021;494:113052. PMID: 33838171. doi:10. 
1016/j.jim.2021.113052
54. Tesar D, Hotzel I. A dual host vector for Fab phage display and 
expression of native IgG in mammalian cells. Protein Eng Des Sel. 
2013;26:655–62. PMID: 24065833. doi:10.1093/protein/gzt050
55. Batonick M, Kiss MM, Fuller EP, Magadan CM, Holland EG, 
Zhao Q, Wang D, Kay BK, Weiner MP. pMINERVA: a 
donor-acceptor system for the in vivo recombineering of scFv 
into IgG molecules. J Immunol Methods. 2016;431:22–30. PMID: 
26851519. doi:10.1016/j.jim.2016.02.003
56. Xiao X, Douthwaite JA, Chen Y, Kemp B, Kidd S, Percival- 
Alwyn J, Smith A, Goode K, Swerdlow B, Lowe D, et al. A 
high-throughput platform for population reformatting and mam­
malian expression of phage display libraries to enable functional 
screening as full-length IgG. MAbs. 2017;9(6):996–1006. PMID: 
28613102. doi:10.1080/19420862.2017.1337617.
57. Liu Y, Gu M, Wu Y, Wang W, Wang R, Du M, Ma P, Zhou X, 
Wang Y, Cao Y, et al. High-throughput reformatting of 
12
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 14 ---
phage-displayed antibody fragments to IgGs by one-step emulsion 
PCR. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2018;31:427–36. PMID: 31096267. 
doi:10.1093/protein/gzz004.
58. Rhiel L, Krah S, Gunther R, Becker S, Kolmar H, Hock B, 
Sturtevant J. REAL-Select: full-length antibody display and library 
screening by surface capture on yeast cells. PLos One. 2014;9(12): 
e114887. PMID: 25501029. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0114887.
59. Zhou C, Jacobsen FW, Cai L, Chen Q, Shen WD. Development of 
a novel mammalian cell surface antibody display platform. MAbs. 
2010;2:508–18. PMID: 20716968. doi:10.4161/mabs.2.5.12970
60. Akamatsu Y, Pakabunto K, Xu Z, Zhang Y, Tsurushita N. Whole 
IgG surface display on mammalian cells: application to isolation of 
neutralizing chicken monoclonal anti-IL-12 antibodies. J Immunol 
Methods. 2007;327:40–52. PMID: 17719061. doi:10.1016/j.jim. 
2007.07.007
61. O’Callaghan R, Bradley R, Paranchych W. The effect of M13 phage 
infection upon the F pili of E. coli. Virology. 1973;54:220–29. 
PMID: 4123460. doi:10.1016/0042-6822(73)90131-1
62. Stengele I, Bross P, Garces X, Giray J, Rasched I. Dissection of 
functional 
domains 
in 
phage 
fd 
adsorption 
protein. 
Discrimination between attachment and penetration sites. J Mol 
Biol. 1990;212:143–49. PMID: 2319594. doi:10.1016/0022- 
2836(90)90311-9
63. Sidhu SS. Engineering M13 for phage display. Biomol Eng. 
2001;18:57–63. PMID: 11535417. doi:10.1016/s1389-0344(01) 
00087-9
64. Loset GA, Sandlie I. Next generation phage display by use of pVII 
and pIX as display scaffolds. Methods. 2012;58:40–46. PMID: 
22819858. doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.07.005
65. Kehoe JW, Kay BK. Filamentous phage display in the new 
millennium. Chem Rev. 2005;105:4056–72. PMID: 16277371. 
doi:10.1021/cr000261r
66. Lowman HB, Bass SH, Simpson N, Wells JA. Selecting 
high-affinity binding proteins by monovalent phage display. 
Biochemistry. 1991;30:10832–38. PMID: 1932005. doi:10.1021/ 
bi00109a004
67. Lee CV, Sidhu SS, Fuh G. Bivalent antibody phage display mimics 
natural immunoglobulin. J Immunol Methods. 2004;284:119–32. 
PMID: 14736422. doi:10.1016/j.jim.2003.11.001
68. Nilsson B, Moks T, Jansson B, Abrahmsen L, Elmblad A, 
Holmgren E, Henrichson C, Jones TA, Uhlen M. A synthetic 
IgG-binding domain based on staphylococcal protein a. Protein 
Eng. 1987;1:107–13. PMID: 3507693. doi:10.1093/protein/1.2.107
69. Rodi DJ, Makowski L. Phage-display technology–finding a needle 
in a vast molecular haystack. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 
1999;10:87–93. PMID: 10047512. doi:10.1016/s0958-1669(99) 
80016-0
70. Omidfar K, Daneshpour M. Advances in phage display technology 
for drug discovery. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2015;10:651–69. 
PMID: 25910798. doi:10.1517/17460441.2015.1037738
71. Chang A, Ting JP, Espada A, Broughton H, Molina-Martin M, 
Afshar S. A novel phage display vector for selection of 
target-specific peptides. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2020;33 PMID: 
33009572. doi:10.1093/protein/gzaa023.
72. Bass S, Greene R, Wells JA. Hormone phage: an enrichment 
method for variant proteins with altered binding properties. 
Proteins. 1990;8:309–14. PMID: 1708882. doi:10.1002/prot. 
340080405
73. Sidhu SS, Geyer CR. Phage display in biotechnology and drug 
discovery. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press; 2015.
74. Azzazy HM, Highsmith WE Jr. Phage display technology: clinical 
applications 
and 
recent 
innovations. 
Clin 
Biochem. 
2002;35:425–45. PMID: 12413604. doi:10.1016/s0009-9120(02) 
00343-0
75. Felici F, Castagnoli L, Musacchio A, Jappelli R, Cesareni G. 
Selection of antibody ligands from a large library of oligopeptides 
expressed on a multivalent exposition vector. J Mol Biol. 
1991;222:301–10. PMID: 1720463. doi:10.1016/0022-2836(91) 
90213-p
76. Kwasnikowski P, Kristensen P, Markiewicz WT. Multivalent dis­
play system on filamentous bacteriophage pVII minor coat 
protein. J Immunol Methods. 2005;307:135–43. PMID: 16277988. 
doi:10.1016/j.jim.2005.10.002
77. Wang KC, Wang X, Zhong P, Luo PP. Adapter-directed display: 
a modular design for shuttling display on phage surfaces. J Mol 
Biol. 2010;395:1088–101. PMID: 19969002. doi:10.1016/j.jmb. 
2009.11.068
78. Rondot S, Koch J, Breitling F, Dubel S. A helper phage to improve 
single-chain antibody presentation in phage display. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2001;19:75–78. PMID: 11135557. doi:10.1038/83567
79. Soltes G, Hust M, Ng KK, Bansal A, Field J, Stewart DI, Dubel S, 
Cha S, Wiersma EJ. On the influence of vector design on antibody 
phage display. J Biotechnol. 2007;127:626–37. PMID: 16996161. 
doi:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2006.08.015
80. Kramer RA, Cox F, van der Horst M, van der Oudenrijn S, Res PC, 
Bia J, Logtenberg T, de Kruif J. A novel helper phage that improves 
phage display selection efficiency by preventing the amplification 
of phages without recombinant protein. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2003;31(11):e59. PMID: 12771223. doi:10.1093/nar/gng058.
81. Baek H, Suk KH, Kim YH, Cha S. An improved helper phage 
system for efficient isolation of specific antibody molecules in 
phage display. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002;30:e18. PMID: 11861923. 
doi:10.1093/nar/30.5.e18
82. Soltes G, Barker H, Marmai K, Pun E, Yuen A, Wiersma EJ. A new 
helper phage and phagemid vector system improves viral display 
of antibody Fab fragments and avoids propagation of insert-less 
virions. J Immunol Methods. 2003;274:233–44. PMID: 12609549. 
doi:10.1016/s0022-1759(02)00294-6
83. Beaber JW, Tam EM, Lao LS, Rondon IJ. A new helper phage for 
improved monovalent display of Fab molecules. J Immunol 
Methods. 2012;376:46–54. PMID: 22119405. doi:10.1016/j.jim. 
2011.11.006
84. Shim H. Synthetic approach to the generation of antibody 
diversity. BMB Rep. 2015;48:489–94. PMID: 26129672. doi:10. 
5483/bmbrep.2015.48.9.120
85. Virnekas B, Ge L, Pluckthun A, Schneider KC, Wellnhofer G, 
Moroney SE. Trinucleotide phosphoramidites: ideal reagents for 
the synthesis of mixed oligonucleotides for random mutagenesis. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 1994;22:5600–07. PMID: 7838712. doi:10.1093/ 
nar/22.25.5600
86. Kosuri S, Church GM. Large-scale de novo DNA synthesis: tech­
nologies and applications. Nat Methods. 2014;11:499–507. PMID: 
24781323. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2918
87. den Brulle J V, Fischer M, Langmann T, Horn G, Waldmann T, 
Arnold S, Fuhrmann M, Schatz O, O’Connell T, O’Connell D, et al. 
A novel solid phase technology for high-throughput gene 
synthesis. Biotechniques. 2008;45:340–43. PMID: 18778261. 
doi:10.2144/000112953.
88. Cox A, Treusch S, Chen S, inventors; Twist bioscience corpora­
tions assignees. Oligonucleic acid variant libraries and synthesis 
thereof. United States patent US 2021/0040476A1. 2020 Oct 12.
89. Indermuhle PF, Marsh EP, Fernandez A, Banyai W, Peck BJ, 
inventors; Twist bioscience corporations assignees. Methods and 
devices for de novo oligonucleic acid assembly. WIPO (PCT) 
Patent WO2016/126882A1. 2016 Feb 03.
90. Vaughan TJ, Williams AJ, Pritchard K, Osbourn JK, Pope AR, 
Earnshaw JC, McCafferty J, Hodits RA, Wilton J, Johnson KS. 
Human antibodies with sub-nanomolar affinities isolated from 
a large non-immunized phage display library. Nat Biotechnol. 
1996;14:309–14. PMID: 9630891. doi:10.1038/nbt0396-309
91. Griffiths AD, Williams SC, Hartley O, Tomlinson IM, 
Waterhouse P, Crosby WL, Kontermann RE, Jones PT, Low NM, 
Allison TJ, et al. Isolation of high affinity human antibodies 
directly 
from 
large 
synthetic 
repertoires. 
Embo 
J 
. 
1994;13:3245–60. PMID: 8045255. doi:10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994. 
tb06626.x
92. Bertoglio F, Meier D, Langreder N, Steinke S, Rand U, Simonelli L, 
Heine PA, Ballmann R, Schneider KT, Roth KDR, et al. SARS- 
CoV-2 neutralizing human recombinant antibodies selected from 
MABS
13


--- Page 15 ---
pre-pandemic healthy donors binding at RBD-ACE2 interface. Nat 
Commun. 2021;12:1577. PMID: 33707427. doi:10.1038/s41467- 
021-21609-2.
93. Lloyd C, Lowe D, Edwards B, Welsh F, Dilks T, Hardman C, 
Vaughan T. Modelling the human immune response: performance 
of a 1011 human antibody repertoire against a broad panel of 
therapeutically relevant antigens. Protein Eng Des Sel. 
2009;22:159–68. PMID: 18974080. doi:10.1093/protein/gzn058
94. Soderlind E, Strandberg L, Jirholt P, Kobayashi N, Alexeiva V, 
Aberg AM, Nilsson A, Jansson B, Ohlin M, Wingren C, et al. 
Recombining germline-derived CDR sequences for creating 
diverse single-framework antibody libraries. Nat Biotechnol. 
2000;18:852–56. PMID: 10932154. doi:10.1038/78458.
95. Romani C, Comper F, Bandiera E, Ravaggi A, Bignotti E, Tassi RA, 
Pecorelli S, Santin AD. Development and characterization of 
a human single-chain antibody fragment against claudin-3: 
a novel therapeutic target in ovarian and uterine carcinomas. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 2009;201:70 e71–79. PMID: 19426958. doi:10. 
1016/j.ajog.2009.02.010
96. Weber M, Bujak E, Putelli A, Villa A, Matasci M, Gualandi L, 
Hemmerle T, Wulhfard S, Neri D, Isalan M. A highly functional 
synthetic phage display library containing over 40 billion human 
antibody clones. PLos One. 2014;9:e100000. PMID: 24950200. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0100000.
97. Hoet RM, Cohen EH, Kent RB, Rookey K, Schoonbroodt S, 
Hogan S, Rem L, Frans N, Daukandt M, Pieters H, et al. 
Generation of high-affinity human antibodies by combining 
donor-derived and synthetic complementarity-determining- 
region diversity. Nat Biotechnol. 2005;23(3):344–48. PMID: 
15723048. doi:10.1038/nbt1067.
98. Rothe C, Urlinger S, Lohning C, Prassler J, Stark Y, Jager U, 
Hubner B, Bardroff M, Pradel I, Boss M, et al. The human combi­
natorial antibody library HuCAL GOLD combines diversification 
of all six CDRs according to the natural immune system with 
a novel display method for efficient selection of high-affinity 
antibodies. J Mol Biol. 2008;376:1182–200. PMID: 18191144. 
doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007.12.018.
99. Prassler J, Thiel S, Pracht C, Polzer A, Peters S, Bauer M, 
Norenberg S, Stark Y, Kolln J, Popp A, et al. HuCAL 
PLATINUM, a synthetic Fab library optimized for sequence diver­
sity and superior performance in mammalian expression systems. 
J Mol Biol. 2011;413:261–78. PMID: 21856311. doi:10.1016/j.jmb. 
2011.08.012.
100. Tiller T, Schuster I, Deppe D, Siegers K, Strohner R, Herrmann T, 
Berenguer M, Poujol D, Stehle J, Stark Y, et al. A fully synthetic 
human Fab antibody library based on fixed VH/VL framework 
pairings 
with 
favorable 
biophysical 
properties. 
MAbs. 
2013;5:445–70. PMID: 23571156. doi:10.4161/mabs.24218.
101. Valadon P, Perez-Tapia SM, Nelson RS, Guzman-Bringas OU, 
Arrieta-Oliva HI, Gomez-Castellano KM, Pohl MA, Almagro JC. 
ALTHEA Gold Libraries: antibody libraries for therapeutic anti­
body discovery. MAbs. 2019;11:516–31. PMID: 30663541. doi:10. 
1080/19420862.2019.1571879
102. Teixeira AA, Erasmus MF, D’Angelo S, Naranjo L, Ferrara F, Leal- 
Lopes C, Durrant O, Galmiche C, Morelli A, Scott-Tucker A, et al. 
Drug-like antibodies with high affinity, diversity and developabil­
ity directly from next-generation antibody libraries. MAbs. 
2021;13:1980942. PMID: 34850665. doi:10.1080/19420862.2021. 
1980942.
103. Marks JD, Hoogenboom HR, Bonnert TP, McCafferty J, 
Griffiths AD, Winter G. By-passing immunization. Human anti­
bodies from V-gene libraries displayed on phage. J Mol Biol. 
1991;222:581–97. PMID: 1748994. doi:10.1016/0022-2836(91) 
90498-u
104. Persson MA, Caothien RH, Burton DR. Generation of diverse 
high-affinity human monoclonal antibodies by repertoire 
cloning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991;88:2432–36. PMID: 
1826052. doi:10.1073/pnas.88.6.2432
105. Wang L, Radic MZ, Siegel D, Chang T, Bracy J, Galili U. Cloning of 
anti-Gal Fabs from combinatorial phage display libraries: 
structural analysis and comparison of Fab expression in 
pComb3h and pComb8 phage. Mol Immunol. 1997;34:609–18. 
PMID: 9393964. doi:10.1016/s0161-5890(97)00082-5
106. Siegel DL, Chang TY, Russell SL, Bunya VY. Isolation of cell 
surface-specific human monoclonal antibodies using phage dis­
play and magnetically-activated cell sorting: applications in 
immunohematology. J Immunol Methods. 1997;206:73–85. 
PMID: 9328570. doi:10.1016/s0022-1759(97)00087-2
107. Griffiths AD, Malmqvist M, Marks JD, Bye JM, Embleton MJ, 
McCafferty J, Baier M, Holliger KP, Gorick BD, Hughes- 
Jones NC, et al. Human anti-self antibodies with high specificity 
from phage display libraries. Embo J . 1993;12:725–34. PMID: 
7679990. doi:10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb05706.x
108. Melchers F, ten Boekel E, Seidl T, Kong XC, Yamagami T, 
Onishi K, Shimizu T, Rolink AG, Andersson J. Repertoire selection 
by pre-B-cell receptors and B-cell receptors, and genetic control of 
B-cell development from immature to mature B cells. Immunol 
Rev. 2000;175:33–46. PMID: 10933589 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov/pubmed/10933589 .
109. Wardemann H, Yurasov S, Schaefer A, Young JW, Meffre E, 
Nussenzweig MC. Predominant autoantibody production by 
early human B cell precursors. Science. 2003;301:1374–77. PMID: 
12920303. doi:10.1126/science.1086907
110. Kugler J, Wilke S, Meier D, Tomszak F, Frenzel A, Schirrmann T, 
Dubel S, Garritsen H, Hock B, Toleikis L, et al. Generation and 
analysis of the improved human HAL9/10 antibody phage display 
libraries. BMC Biotechnol. 2015;15:10. PMID: 25888378. doi:10. 
1186/s12896-015-0125-0.
111. Hoogenboom HR, Winter G. By-passing immunisation. Human 
antibodies from synthetic repertoires of germline VH gene seg­
ments rearranged in vitro. J Mol Biol. 1992;227:381–88. PMID: 
1404359. doi:10.1016/0022-2836(92)90894-p
112. Barbas CF 3rd, Bain JD, Hoekstra DM, Lerner RA. Semisynthetic 
combinatorial antibody libraries: a chemical solution to the diver­
sity problem. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992;89:4457–61. PMID: 
1584777. doi:10.1073/pnas.89.10.4457
113. Garrard LJ, Henner DJ. Selection of an anti-IGF-1 Fab from a Fab 
phage library created by mutagenesis of multiple CDR loops. 
Gene. 1993;128:103–09. PMID: 8099557. doi:10.1016/0378- 
1119(93)90160-5
114. de Haard HJ, van Neer N, Reurs A, Hufton SE, Roovers RC, 
Henderikx P, Arends J-W, de Bruine AP, de Haard JW, 
Hoogenboom HR, et al. A large non-immunized human Fab frag­
ment phage library that permits rapid isolation and kinetic analysis 
of high affinity antibodies. J Biol Chem. 1999;274:18218–30. 
PMID: 10373423. doi:10.1074/jbc.274.26.18218.
115. Schwimmer LJ, Huang B, Giang H, Cotter RL, Chemla-Vogel DS, 
Dy FV, Tam EM, Zhang F, Toy P, Bohmann DJ, et al. Discovery of 
diverse and functional antibodies from large human repertoire 
antibody libraries. J Immunol Methods. 2013;391:60–71. PMID: 
23454004. doi:10.1016/j.jim.2013.02.010.
116. Diebolder P, Keller A, Haase S, Schlegelmilch A, Kiefer JD, 
Karimi T, Weber T, Moldenhauer G, Kehm R, Eis- 
Hubinger AM, et al. Generation of “LYmph Node Derived 
Antibody Libraries” (LYNDAL) for selecting fully human antibody 
fragments with therapeutic potential. MAbs. 2014;6:130–42. 
PMID: 24256717. doi:10.4161/mabs.27236.
117. Lee CV, Liang WC, Dennis MS, Eigenbrot C, Sidhu SS, Fuh G. 
High-affinity human antibodies from phage-displayed synthetic 
Fab libraries with a single framework scaffold. J Mol Biol. 
2004;340:1073–93. PMID: 15236968. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2004. 
05.051
118. Kim S, Park I, Park SG, Cho S, Kim JH, Ipper NS, Choi SS, 
Lee ES, Hong HJ. Generation, diversity determination, and 
application to antibody selection of a human naive fab 
library. Mol Cells. 2017;40:655–66. PMID: 28927259. doi:10. 
14348/molcells.2017.0106
119. Jespers 
LS, 
Roberts 
A, 
Mahler 
SM, 
Winter 
G, 
Hoogenboom HR. Guiding the selection of human antibodies 
from phage display repertoires to a single epitope of an 
14
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 16 ---
antigen. Biotechnology (N Y). 1994;12:899–903. PMID: 
7521646. doi:10.1038/nbt0994-899
120. Baker KP, Edwards BM, Main SH, Choi GH, Wager RE, 
Halpern WG, Lappin PB, Riccobene T, Abramian D, Sekut L, 
et al. Generation and characterization of LymphoStat-B, 
a human monoclonal antibody that antagonizes the bioactivities 
of B lymphocyte stimulator. Arthritis Rheum. 2003;48:3253–65. 
PMID: 14613291. doi:10.1002/art.11299.
121. Ho M, Nagata S, Pastan I. Isolation of anti-CD22 Fv with high 
affinity by Fv display on human cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2006;103:9637–42. 
PMID: 
16763048. 
doi:10.1073/pnas. 
0603653103
122. Dhillon S. Moxetumomab pasudotox: first global approval. 
Drugs. 2018;78:1763–67. PMID: 30357593. doi:10.1007/ 
s40265-018-1000-9
123. Mazumdar S. Raxibacumab. MAbs. 2009;1:531–38. PMID: 
20068396. doi:10.4161/mabs.1.6.10195
124. Al-Salama ZT. Emapalumab: first global approval. Drugs. 
2019;79:99–103. PMID: 30623346. doi:10.1007/s40265-018-1046-8
125. Duggan S. Tralokinumab: first approval. Drugs. 2021;81:1657–63. 
PMID: 34406631. doi:10.1007/s40265-021-01583-1
126. Sommer A, Kopitz C, Schatz CA, Nising CF, Mahlert C, 
Lerchen HG, Stelte-Ludwig B, Hammer S, Greven S, 
Schuhmacher J, et al. Preclinical efficacy of the auristatin-based 
antibody–drug conjugate BAY 1187982 for the treatment of 
FGFR2-positive solid tumors. Cancer Res. 2016;76:6331–39. 
PMID: 27543601. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-0180.
127. Jerkeman M, McAllister A, Roos C, Andersson ML, Karlsson I, 
Borggren M, Abrisqueta P, Carneiro A, Cordoba R, Hagberg H, 
et al. 17-BI-1206-02 phase 1/2a clinical trial of BI-1206, 
a monoclonal antibody to fcgriib, in combination with rituximab 
in subjects with indolent B-Cell non-hodgkin lymphoma that has 
relapsed or is refractory to rituximab. Blood. 2020;136:2. doi:10. 
1182/blood-2020-140219.
128. Willuda J, Linden L, Lerchen HG, Kopitz C, Stelte-Ludwig B, 
Pena C, Lange C, Golfier S, Kneip C, Carrigan PE, et al. 
Preclinical antitumor efficacy of BAY 1129980—a novel aurista­
tin-based anti-C4.4A (LYPD3) antibody–drug conjugate for the 
treatment of non–small cell lung cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 
2017;16:893–904. PMID: 28292941. doi:10.1158/1535-7163.MCT- 
16-0474.
129. Wichert S, Juliusson G, Johansson A, Sonesson E, Teige I, 
Wickenberg AT, Frendeus B, Korsgren M, Hansson M, Hills RK. 
A single-arm, open-label, phase 2 clinical trial evaluating disease 
response 
following 
treatment 
with 
BI-505, 
a 
human 
anti-intercellular adhesion molecule-1 monoclonal antibody, in 
patients with smoldering multiple myeloma. PLos One. 2017;12: 
e0171205. PMID: 28158311. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0171205.
130. Lehrer-Graiwer J, Singh P, Abdelbaky A, Vucic E, Korsgren M, 
Baruch A, Fredrickson J, van Bruggen N, Tang MT, Frendeus B, 
et al. FDG-PET imaging for oxidized LDL in stable atherosclerotic 
disease: a phase II study of safety, tolerability, and 
anti-inflammatory 
activity. 
JACC 
Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 
2015;8:493–94. PMID: 25457756. doi:10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.06.021.
131. Sall A, Walle M, Wingren C, Muller S, Nyman T, Vala A, Ohlin M, 
Borrebaeck CAK, Persson H. Generation and analyses of human 
synthetic antibody libraries and their application for protein 
microarrays. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2016;29(10):427–37. PMID: 
27590051. doi:10.1093/protein/gzw042.
132. Persson H, Ye W, Wernimont A, Adams JJ, Koide A, Koide S, 
Lam R, Sidhu SS. CDR-H3 diversity is not required for antigen 
recognition by synthetic antibodies. J Mol Biol. 2013;425 
(4):803–11. PMID: 23219464. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2012.11.037.
133. Pini A, Viti F, Santucci A, Carnemolla B, Zardi L, Neri P, Neri D. 
Design and use of a phage display library. Human antibodies with 
subnanomolar affinity against a marker of angiogenesis eluted 
from a two-dimensional gel. J Biol Chem. 1998;273:21769–76. 
PMID: 9705314. doi:10.1074/jbc.273.34.21769
134. Silacci M, Brack S, Schirru G, Marlind J, Ettorre A, Merlo A, Viti F, 
Neri D. Design, construction, and characterization of a large 
synthetic human antibody phage display library. Proteomics. 
2005;5:2340–50. PMID: 15880779. doi:10.1002/pmic.200401273
135. Villa A, Lovato V, Bujak E, Wulhfard S, Pasche N, Neri D. A novel 
synthetic naive human antibody library allows the isolation of 
antibodies against a new epitope of oncofetal fibronectin. MAbs. 
2011;3:264–72. PMID: 21487243. doi:10.4161/mabs.3.3.15616
136. Danielli R, Patuzzo R, Di Giacomo AM, Gallino G, Maurichi A, Di 
Florio A, Cutaia O, Lazzeri A, Fazio C, Miracco C, et al. 
Intralesional administration of L19-IL2/L19-TNF in stage III or 
stage IVM1a melanoma patients: results of a phase II study. 
Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015;64:999–1009. PMID: 
25971540. doi:10.1007/s00262-015-1704-6.
137. Erba PA, Sollini M, Orciuolo E, Traino C, Petrini M, Paganelli G, 
Bombardieri E, Grana C, Giovannoni L, Neri D, et al. 
Radioimmunotherapy with radretumab in patients with relapsed 
hematologic malignancies. J Nucl Med. 2012;53:922–27. PMID: 
22577235. doi:10.2967/jnumed.111.101006.
138. Schliemann C, Gutbrodt KL, Kerkhoff A, Pohlen M, Wiebe S, 
Silling G, Angenendt L, Kessler T, Mesters RM, Giovannoni L, 
et al. Targeting interleukin-2 to the bone marrow stroma for 
therapy of acute myeloid leukemia relapsing after allogeneic hema­
topoietic stem cell transplantation. Cancer Immunol Res. 
2015;3:547–56. PMID: 25672398. doi:10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14- 
0179.
139. Galeazzi M, Sebastiani G, Voll R, Viapiana O, Dudler J, Zufferey P, 
Selvi E, Finzel S, Bootz FS, Neri D. Fri0118 dekavil (F8IL10) – 
update on the results of clinical trials investigating the immuno­
cytokine in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2018;77. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-eular.5550.
140. Villa A, Trachsel E, Kaspar M, Schliemann C, Sommavilla R, 
Rybak JN, Rosli C, Borsi L, Neri D. A high-affinity human mono­
clonal antibody specific to the alternatively spliced EDA domain of 
fibronectin efficiently targets tumor neo-vasculature in vivo. 
Int J Cancer. 2008;122:2405–13. PMID: 18271006. doi:10.1002/ 
ijc.23408
141. Ignatovich O, Tomlinson IM, Jones PT, Winter G. The creation of 
diversity in the human immunoglobulin V(lambda) repertoire. 
J Mol Biol. 1997;268:69–77. PMID: 9149142. doi:10.1006/jmbi. 
1997.0956
142. Detanico T, Phillips M, Wysocki LJ. Functional versatility of AGY 
serine codons in immunoglobulin variable region genes. Front 
Immunol. 2016;7:525. PMID: 27920779. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016. 
00525
143. Glanville J, Zhai W, Berka J, Telman D, Huerta G, Mehta GR, Ni I, 
Mei L, Sundar PD, Day GM, et al. Precise determination of the 
diversity of a combinatorial antibody library gives insight into the 
human immunoglobulin repertoire. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2009;106:20216–21. 
PMID: 
19875695. 
doi:10.1073/pnas. 
0909775106.
144. Poole RM, Vaidya A. Ramucirumab: first global approval. Drugs. 
2014;74:1047–58. PMID: 24916147. doi:10.1007/s40265-014-0244-2
145. Garnock-Jones KP. Necitumumab: first global approval. Drugs. 
2016;76:283–89. PMID: 26729188. doi:10.1007/s40265-015-0537-0
146. ES K. Avelumab: first global approval. Drugs. 2017;77:929–37. 
PMID: 28456944. doi:10.1007/s40265-017-0749-6
147. Syed YY. Lanadelumab: first global approval. Drugs. 
2018;78:1633–37. PMID: 30267321. doi:10.1007/s40265-018- 
0987-2
148. Jian JW, Chen HS, Chiu YK, Peng HP, Tung CP, Chen IC, Yu CM, 
Tsou YL, Kuo WY, Hsu HJ, et al. Effective binding to protein 
antigens by antibodies from antibody libraries designed with 
enhanced 
protein 
recognition 
propensities. 
MAbs. 
2019;11:373–87. PMID: 30526270. doi:10.1080/19420862.2018. 
1550320.
149. Fellouse FA, Wiesmann C, Sidhu SS. Synthetic antibodies from a 
four-amino-acid code: a dominant role for tyrosine in antigen 
recognition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:12467–72. 
PMID: 15306681. doi:10.1073/pnas.0401786101
150. Fellouse FA, Esaki K, Birtalan S, Raptis D, Cancasci VJ, 
Koide A, Jhurani P, Vasser M, Wiesmann C, Kossiakoff AA, 
MABS
15


--- Page 17 ---
et al. High-throughput generation of synthetic antibodies from 
highly functional minimalist phage-displayed libraries. J Mol 
Biol. 2007;373:924–40. PMID: 17825836. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007. 
08.005.
151. Knappik A, Ge L, Honegger A, Pack P, Fischer M, Wellnhofer G, 
Hoess A, Wolle J, Pluckthun A, Virnekas B. Fully synthetic human 
combinatorial antibody libraries (HuCAL) based on modular con­
sensus frameworks and CDRs randomized with trinucleotides. J Mol 
Biol. 2000;296:57–86. PMID: 10656818. doi:10.1006/jmbi.1999.3444
152. Markham A. Guselkumab: first global approval. Drugs. 
2017;77:1487–92. PMID: 28819723. doi:10.1007/s40265-017- 
0800-7
153. Jespers L, Schon O, Famm K, Winter G. Aggregation-resistant 
domain antibodies selected on phage by heat denaturation. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2004;22:1161–65. PMID: 15300256. doi:10.1038/ 
nbt1000
154. Mendoza-Salazar I, Gomez-Castellano KM, Gonzalez-Gonzalez E, 
Gamboa-Suasnavart R, Rodriguez-Luna SD, Santiago-Casas G, 
Cortes-Paniagua MI, Perez-Tapia SM, Almagro JC. Anti-SARS- 
CoV-2 omicron antibodies isolated from a SARS-CoV-2 delta 
semi-immune phage display library. Antibodies (Basel). 2022;11 
(1):13. PMID: 35225871. doi:10.3390/antib11010013.
155. Pedraza-Escalona M, Guzman-Bringas O, Arrieta-Oliva HI, 
Gomez-Castellano K, Salinas-Trujano J, Torres-Flores J, Munoz- 
Herrera JC, Camacho-Sandoval R, Contreras-Pineda P, Chacon- 
Salinas R, et al. Isolation and characterization of high affinity and 
highly stable anti-Chikungunya virus antibodies using ALTHEA 
gold libraries™. BMC Infect Dis. 2021;21:1121. PMID: 34717584. 
doi:10.1186/s12879-021-06717-0.
156. Schwabl S, Teis D. Protein quality control at the Golgi. Curr Opin 
Cell Biol. 2022;75:102074. PMID: 35364487. doi:10.1016/j.ceb. 
2022.02.008
157. Phillips BP, Gomez-Navarro N, Miller EA. Protein quality control 
in 
the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Curr 
Opin 
Cell Biol. 
2020;65:96–102. PMID: 32408120. doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2020.04.002
158. Shusta EV, Kieke MC, Parke E, Kranz DM, Wittrup KD. Yeast 
polypeptide fusion surface display levels predict thermal stability 
and soluble secretion efficiency. J Mol Biol. 1999;292:949–56. 
PMID: 10512694. doi:10.1006/jmbi.1999.3130
159. Sriram K, Insel PA. G protein-coupled receptors as targets for 
approved drugs: how many targets and how many drugs? Mol 
Pharmacol. 2018;93:251–58. PMID: 29298813. doi:10.1124/mol. 
117.111062
160. Hauser AS, Attwood MM, Rask-Andersen M, Schioth HB, 
Gloriam DE. Trends in GPCR drug discovery: new agents, targets 
and indications. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2017;16:829–42. PMID: 
29075003. doi:10.1038/nrd.2017.178
161. Mullard A. FDA approves second GPCR-targeted antibody. Nat 
Rev Drug Discov. 2018;17:613. PMID: 30160256. doi:10.1038/nrd. 
2018.153
162. Dodd R, Schofield DJ, Wilkinson T, Britton ZT. Generating ther­
apeutic monoclonal antibodies to complex multi-spanning mem­
brane targets: overcoming the antigen challenge and enabling 
discovery 
strategies. 
Methods. 
2020;180:111–26. 
PMID: 
32422249. doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2020.05.006.
163. Devanaboyina SC, Lynch SM, Ober RJ, Ram S, Kim D, Puig- 
Canto A, Breen S, Kasturirangan S, Fowler S, Peng L, et al. The 
effect of pH dependence of antibody-antigen interactions on sub­
cellular trafficking dynamics. MAbs. 2013;5:851–59. PMID: 
24492341. doi:10.4161/mabs.26389.
164. Roopenian DC, Akilesh S. FcRn: the neonatal Fc receptor comes of 
age. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007;7:715–25. PMID: 17703228. doi:10. 
1038/nri2155
165. Igawa T, Ishii S, Tachibana T, Maeda A, Higuchi Y, Shimaoka S, 
Moriyama C, Watanabe T, Takubo R, Doi Y, et al. Antibody 
recycling by engineered Ph-dependent antigen binding improves 
the duration of antigen neutralization. Nat Biotechnol. 
2010;28:1203–07. PMID: 20953198. doi:10.1038/nbt.1691.
166. Chaparro-Riggers J, Liang H, DeVay RM, Bai L, Sutton JE, 
Chen W, Geng T, Lindquist K, Casas MG, Boustany LM, et al. 
Increasing serum half-life and extending cholesterol lowering 
in vivo by engineering antibody with Ph-sensitive binding to 
PCSK9. J Biol Chem. 2012;287:11090–97. PMID: 22294692. 
doi:10.1074/jbc.M111.319764.
167. Igawa T, Maeda A, Haraya K, Tachibana T, Iwayanagi Y, 
Mimoto F, Higuchi Y, Ishii S, Tamba S, Hironiwa N, et al. 
Engineered monoclonal antibody with novel antigen-sweeping 
activity in vivo. PLos One. 2013;8:e63236. PMID: 23667591. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0063236.
168. Zemlin M, Klinger M, Link J, Zemlin C, Bauer K, Engler JA, 
Schroeder HW Jr., Kirkham PM. Expressed murine and human 
CDR-H3 intervals of equal length exhibit distinct repertoires that 
differ in their amino acid composition and predicted range of 
structures. J Mol Biol. 2003;334:733–49. PMID: 14636599. doi:10. 
1016/j.jmb.2003.10.007
169. Johnson G, Wu TT. Preferred CDRH3 lengths for antibodies with 
defined specificities. Int Immunol. 1998;10:1801–05. PMID: 
9885900. doi:10.1093/intimm/10.12.1801
170. Collis AV, Brouwer AP, Martin AC. Analysis of the antigen com­
bining site: correlations between length and sequence composition 
of the hypervariable loops and the nature of the antigen. J Mol Biol. 
2003;325:337–54. PMID: 12488099. doi:10.1016/s0022-2836(02) 
01222-6
171. Mascola JR, Haynes BF. HIV-1 neutralizing antibodies: under­
standing nature’s pathways. Immunol Rev. 2013;254:225–44. 
PMID: 23772623. doi:10.1111/imr.12075
172. McLellan JS, Pancera M, Carrico C, Gorman J, Julien JP, Khayat R, 
Louder R, Pejchal R, Sastry M, Dai K, et al. Structure of HIV-1 
gp120 V1/V2 domain with broadly neutralizing antibody PG9. 
Nature. 
2011;480:336–43. PMID: 
22113616. doi:10.1038/ 
nature10696.
173. Muyldermans S, Baral TN, Retamozzo VC, De Baetselier P, De 
Genst E, Kinne J, Leonhardt H, Magez S, Nguyen VK, Revets H, 
et al. Camelid immunoglobulins and nanobody technology. Vet 
Immunol Immunopathol. 2009;128:178–83. PMID: 19026455. 
doi:10.1016/j.vetimm.2008.10.299.
174. Haakenson JK, Huang R, Smider VV. Diversity in the cow ultra­
long CDR H3 antibody repertoire. Front Immunol. 2018;9:1262. 
PMID: 29915599. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.01262.
175. Wang F, Ekiert DC, Ahmad I, Yu W, Zhang Y, Bazirgan O, 
Torkamani A, Raudsepp T, Mwangi W, Criscitiello MF, et al. 
Reshaping antibody diversity. Cell. 2013;153:1379–93. PMID: 
23746848. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.049.
176. Nam DH, Rodriguez C, Remacle AG, Strongin AY, Ge X. Active- 
site MMP-selective antibody inhibitors discovered from convex 
paratope synthetic libraries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113 
(52):14970–75. PMID: 27965386. doi:10.1073/pnas.1609375114.
177. Bai X, Kim J, Kang S, Kim W, Shim H, Gill AC. A novel human 
scFv library with non-combinatorial synthetic CDR diversity. PLos 
One. 2015;10:e0141045. PMID: 26484868. doi:10.1371/journal. 
pone.0141045.
178. Bhat NM, Bieber MM, Stevenson FK, Teng NN. Rapid cytotoxicity 
of human B lymphocytes induced by VH4-34 (VH4.21) 
gene-encoded monoclonal antibodies. Clin Exp Immunol. 
1996;105:183–90. PMID: 8697629. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2249.1996. 
d01-733.x
179. Jayaram N, Bhowmick P, Martin AC. Germline VH/VL pairing in 
antibodies. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2012;25:523–29. PMID: 22802295. 
doi:10.1093/protein/gzs043
180. Ewert S, Huber T, Honegger A, Pluckthun A. Biophysical proper­
ties of human antibody variable domains. J Mol Biol. 
2003;325:531–53. PMID: 12498801. doi:10.1016/s0022-2836(02) 
01237-8
181. Derda R, Tang SK, Li SC, Ng S, Matochko W, Jafari MR. Diversity 
of phage-displayed libraries of peptides during panning and 
amplification. Molecules. 2011;16:1776–803. PMID: 21339712. 
doi:10.3390/molecules16021776
182. Matochko WL, Cory Li S, Tang SK, Derda R. Prospective identi­
fication of parasitic sequences in phage display screens. Nucleic 
16
Y. ZHANG


--- Page 18 ---
Acids Res. 2014;42:1784–98. PMID: 24217917. doi:10.1093/nar/ 
gkt1104
183. Zambrano N, Froechlich G, Lazarevic D, Passariello M, Nicosia A, 
De Lorenzo C, Morelli MJ, Sasso E. High-throughput monoclonal 
antibody discovery from phage libraries: challenging the current 
preclinical pipeline to keep the pace with the increasing mAb 
demand. Cancers (Basel). 2022;14 PMID: 35267633. doi:10.3390/ 
cancers14051325.
184. Rouet R, Jackson KJL, Langley DB, Christ D. Next-generation sequen­
cing of antibody display repertoires. Front Immunol. 2018;9:118. 
PMID: 29472918. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00118
185. Wilman W, Wrobel S, Bielska W, Deszynski P, Dudzic P, 
Jaszczyszyn I, Kaniewski J, Mlokosiewicz J, Rouyan A, Satlawa T, 
et al. Machine-designed biotherapeutics: opportunities, feasibility 
and advantages of deep learning in computational antibody 
discovery. Brief Bioinform. 2022;23: PMID: 35830864. doi:10. 
1093/bib/bbac267.
186. Akbar R, Bashour H, Rawat P, Robert PA, Smorodina E, 
Cotet TS, Flem-Karlsen K, Frank R, Mehta BB, Vu MH, 
et al. Progress and challenges for the machine learning-based 
design of fit-for-purpose monoclonal antibodies. MAbs. 
2022;14:2008790. PMID: 35293269. doi:10.1080/19420862. 
2021.2008790.
187. Jain T, Sun T, Durand S, Hall A, Houston NR, Nett JH, 
Sharkey B, Bobrowicz B, Caffry I, Yu Y, et al. Biophysical 
properties of the clinical-stage antibody landscape. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114:944–49. PMID: 28096333. doi:10. 
1073/pnas.1616408114.
188. Spencer S, Bethea D, Raju TS, Giles-Komar J, Feng Y. Solubility 
evaluation 
of 
murine 
hybridoma 
antibodies. 
MAbs. 
2012;4:319–25. PMID: 22531448. doi:10.4161/mabs.19869
189. Bradbury AR, Sidhu S, Dubel S, McCafferty J. Beyond natural 
antibodies: the power of in vitro display technologies. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2011;29:245–54. PMID: 21390033. doi:10.1038/nbt.1791
190. Dyson MR, Masters E, Pazeraitis D, Perera RL, Syrjanen JL, 
Surade S, Thorsteinson N, Parthiban K, Jones PC, Sattar M, et al. 
Beyond affinity: selection of antibody variants with optimal bio­
physical properties and reduced immunogenicity from mamma­
lian display libraries. MAbs. 2020;12:1829335. PMID: 33103593. 
doi:10.1080/19420862.2020.1829335.
191. Deal CE, Carfi A, Plante OJ. Advancements in mRNA encoded 
antibodies for passive immunotherapy. Vaccines (Basel). 
2021;9:108. PMID: 33572679. doi:10.3390/vaccines9020108.
192. Patel A, Bah MA, Weiner DB. In Vivo delivery of nucleic 
acid-encoded monoclonal antibodies. BioDrugs. 2020;34:273–93. 
PMID: 32157600. doi:10.1007/s40259-020-00412-3
MABS
17
