--- Page 1 ---
Germinal Centers
Gabriel D. Victora1 and Michel C. Nussenzweig2,3
1Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142;
email: victora@wi.mit.edu
2Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065
email: nussen@rockefeller.edu
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012. 30:429–57
First published online as a Review in Advance on
January 3, 2012
The Annual Review of Immunology is online at
immunol.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-immunol-020711-075032
Copyright c⃝2012 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
0732-0582/12/0423-0429$20.00
Keywords
B cell, antibody, afﬁnity maturation, cell dynamics, intravital imaging
Abstract
Germinal centers (GCs) were described more than 125 years ago as
compartments within secondary lymphoid organs that contained mi-
totic cells. Since then, it has become clear that this structure is the site
of B cell clonal expansion, somatic hypermutation, and afﬁnity-based
selection, the combination of which results in the production of high-
afﬁnity antibodies. Decades of anatomical and functional studies have
led to an overall model of how the GC reaction and afﬁnity-based se-
lection operate. More recently, the introduction of intravital imaging
into the GC ﬁeld has opened the door to direct investigation of certain
key dynamic features of this microanatomic structure, sparking renewed
interest in the relationship between cell movement and afﬁnity matura-
tion. We review these and other recent advances in our understanding of
GCs, focusing on cellular dynamics and on the mechanism of selection
of high-afﬁnity B cells.
429
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.
Click here for quick links to 
Annual Reviews content online, 
including:
• Other articles in this volume
• Top cited articles
• Top downloaded articles
• Our comprehensive search
Further
ANNUAL
REVIEWS


--- Page 2 ---
Ig: immunoglobulin
SHM: somatic
hypermutation
GC: germinal center
LZ: light zone
DZ: dark zone
FDC: follicular
dendritic cell
INTRODUCTION
The immune system has the peculiar ability
to respond to foreign substances (or antigens)
by producing immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules
that bind to antigens with extremely high afﬁn-
ity and remarkable speciﬁcity. The question of
how a limited genome encodes for Igs that re-
act speciﬁcally to a virtually limitless number
of antigens puzzled immunologists for decades.
The emergence of the theory of clonal selec-
tion and the discovery of VDJ recombination
resolved critical parts of this problem. While
VDJ recombination attributed the initial gen-
eration of Ig diversity to the combinatorial re-
arrangement of gene segments (1), clonal selec-
tion postulated that the subsequent expansion
of B cell clones whose surface Ig bound to (or
“recognized”) speciﬁc antigens led to the pro-
duction of serum antibodies (2, 3).
In parallel to these discoveries, work on
serum preparations obtained from animals at
different times after immunization showed that
the afﬁnity of the antibodies in serum increased
dramatically with time (4, 5), in a phenomenon
known as afﬁnity maturation. Subsequent ad-
vances in the isolation of Ig molecules from
single B cell clones showed that the high-
afﬁnity antibodies that emerged later in the im-
mune response were not simply the products
of VDJ rearrangement but were, in fact, highly
somatically mutated versions of lower-afﬁnity
germline VDJ sequences (6–8). It is now clear
that afﬁnity maturation is the consequence of
iterative rounds of Darwinian-like selection of
high-afﬁnity mutants generated by somatic hy-
permutation (SHM). The combination of SHM
and afﬁnity-based selection thus provides the
ﬁne-tuning of low-afﬁnity germline VDJ re-
arrangements, greatly expanding the range of
antigenic determinants to which Igs can bind
with high afﬁnity.
Afﬁnity maturation takes place in struc-
tures known as germinal centers (GCs). GCs
were ﬁrst described by Walther Flemming in
1884 as distinct microanatomical regions of sec-
ondary lymphoid organs that contained divid-
ing cells (reviewed in Reference 9). Although
GCs were long believed to be the source of
developing lymphocytes, immunization exper-
iments showed that these structures developed
only in response to antigen, and are in fact the
sites of B cell clonal expansion during immune
responses (9). Under experimental conditions,
GCs initially form at around 6 days after a pri-
mary immunization, when foci of rapidly pro-
liferating B cells begin to appear within the B
cell follicles of lymph nodes and spleen. These
foci increase rapidly in size and, within a few
days of their formation, differentiate into the
structure we know as the mature GC reaction
(10).
Manual dissection of single cells from GCs
made it clear that these structures are the site of
SHM and afﬁnity-based selection (11, 12). GC
B cells express the enzyme activation-induced
deaminase (AID) (13), which deaminates cyti-
dine residues in the VDJ and switch regions of
the Ig gene, leading to SHM and class switch
recombination (14–16). The rate of mutation in
the Ig variable (V-) regions during SHM in the
GC is estimated to be as high as 103 per base pair
per generation (106-fold the normal rate of so-
matic mutation) (7, 8). Because AID is targeted
to ssDNA at sites where transcription is stalled
(17–19), AID can also damage the genome at
sites other than Ig loci, producing mutations in
oncogenes and initiating chromosome translo-
cations that lead to GC lymphomas (15).
From the very beginning, the GC was
viewed primarily as an anatomical entity. GCs
were clearly visible by conventional histology
techniques, as was their division into “light”
and “dark” zones (LZ and DZ, respectively) (9).
Cells were found to proliferate extensively in
the GC DZ, whereas antigen was found de-
posited on the follicular dendritic cell (FDC)
network of the LZ (20, 21). Pulse-chase experi-
ments suggested that B cells migrate between
the two GC compartments and that DZ/LZ
polarization reﬂects a progenitor-product re-
lationship (22, 23).
The idea of the GC as a highly dynamic
entity was proven correct when three groups,
including our own, independently used multi-
photon laser-scanning microscopy to visualize
430
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 3 ---
the events taking place during the GC reaction
(24–27). These studies provided a real-time pic-
ture of the GC reaction: B cells not only move
constantly throughout the entire GC, but also
engage in short, dynamic interactions with both
T cells and antigen. Rather than an enclosed
structure, the GC provides open access to “in-
vading” naive B cells, and the peculiarity of the
migration patterns of GC B cells cast doubt on
the established models of how afﬁnity-based se-
lection takes place. In parallel, advances in our
understanding of the helper T cells that both
support and control the GC reaction have shed
light on the important role these cells play in
enhancing B cell afﬁnity while controlling the
emergence of humoral autoimmunity (28–31).
The aim of the present review is to summa-
rize and discuss these and other recent devel-
opments in GC biology—with special emphasis
on the cellular events leading to the selection of
high-afﬁnity B clones and afﬁnity maturation—
and to update the classical model of the GC
proposed by Ian MacLennan (23) to accommo-
date these new ﬁndings. We focus mostly on in
vivo experiments, in part because it is not yet
possible to reproduce the GC reaction in vitro.
GERMINAL CENTER CELL TYPES
Under speciﬁc pathogen-free conditions, sec-
ondary lymphoid organs such as spleen and
lymph nodes contain follicles primarily com-
posed of naive B lymphocytes. Roughly one
week after exposure to antigen, GCs develop
in the center of these B cell areas, forming
secondary follicles. Naive B cells are pushed
aside by the developing GC, forming a com-
partment termed the B cell mantle (23). The
most conspicuous anatomical feature of the
GC is its division into two distinct compart-
ments, a DZ, proximal to the T cell zone,
and an LZ, proximal to the lymph-node cap-
sule or the spleen marginal zone (Figure 1a).
The DZ consists almost entirely of B cells
with a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio, thus
appearing “dark” by light microscopy (9). By
contrast, B cells in the LZ are interspersed
among a network of FDCs (Figure 1b), which
give this zone its “lighter” appearance (32). In
addition to antigen-speciﬁc GC B cells and
FDCs, the LZ also contains a substantial pop-
ulation of naive IgD+ B cells, which are con-
tinually in transit through the GC (24, 33,
34). The LZ also contains T cells (Figure 1c),
most of which are of the CD4+ lineage, but
some of which are CD8+ (35), as well as a
small number of conventional dendritic cells
(36, 37). Finally, tingible-body macrophages,
a specialized group of phagocytes that engulf
dying B cells that develop during GC selection,
are found throughout the GC (Figure 1d ) (38).
Germinal Center B Cells
The great majority of cells in the GC are
activated B cells. These differ from their naive
counterparts in a number of important ways.
GC B cells are larger than naive cells and
display a highly polarized morphology, with
evident leading edges and extended uropods
(Figure 1c) (24–26). Whereas naive B cells
rarely divide, GC B cells are among the fastest
dividing mammalian cells, with a cell-cycle time
estimated at between 6 and 12 h (25, 26, 39, 40).
GC B cells can be identiﬁed by their expression
of high levels of Fas and n-glycolylneuraminic
acid (the ligand of antibody GL-7), binding
to peanut agglutinin, loss of surface IgD, and
idiosyncratic changes in expression of CD38
(downregulation in mice and upregulation in
humans), among other markers (41–46). GC
cells also differ from resting B cells in their ex-
pression of the chemotactic G protein–coupled
receptors Ebi2 and S1P2. Ebi2 is highly
expressed on naive but not on GC B cells, and
its absence aids in the localization of GC B cells
to the center of the follicle (47, 48). Ebi2 is a
receptor for oxysterols, likely to be produced by
stromal cells in the outer B cell follicle (49, 50).
Unlike Ebi2, S1P2 is upregulated in GC B cells
and, by a yet unresolved mechanism, promotes
the positioning of GC B cells in S1P-low
regions in the center of the follicle (51).
A critical regulator of the GC B cell phe-
notype is the transcription factor Bcl-6 (52,
53). Bcl-6 acts primarily as a transcriptional
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
431
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 4 ---
Light zone:
      FDCs
      GC B cells
      Naive B cells
      T cells, cDCs, TBMs
      (not shown)
Dark zone:
      GC B cells
      TBMs (not shown)
Lymph node
capsule
Follicular mantle: 
Naive B cells
T cell zone
a
b
c
d
20 µm
20 µm
20 µm
100 µm
FDCs
GC B cells
GC B cells
Macrophage
Naive B cells
GC B cell
GC T cells
Figure 1
GC anatomy and cell types. (a) The GC is divided into light and dark zones. Frozen tissue sample stained
with antibodies to CD35 (FDC network), IgD (mantle B cells), and GFP (which stained a fraction of
GFP-expressing GC B cells). (b) Higher-magniﬁcation view of the FDC network. Frozen-tissue section
stained with antibody to CD35 (red ) and GFP ( green) colors as in panel a. (c) Intravital multiphoton image
showing the morphology of a GFP-expressing GC B cell, contrasted to dsRed-expressing naive B cells and
CFP-expressing GC T cells. Note that the highly polarized morphology of GC B cells is fully retained only
in live tissue. (d ) Multiphoton image of a nonliving tissue explant showing a tingible body macrophage (from
YFP expression, CD11c-YFP transgenic mouse) ingesting dying CFP-expressing GC B cells. Abbreviations:
CFP, cyan ﬂuorescent protein; FDC, follicular dendritic cell; GC, germinal center; GFP, green ﬂuorescent
protein; YFP, yellow ﬂuorescent protein. Images by G.D.V. and Z. Shulman. Panel (a) reprinted with
permission from Reference 31, c⃝2010 Elsevier.
repressor (53). In B cells, Bcl-6 is selectively
upregulated during the GC stage (54, 55), and
mice lacking Bcl-6 are incapable of forming
GCs or producing high-afﬁnity antibody (56,
57). Bcl-6 serves at least four important func-
tions in generating the GC B cell phenotype.
First, Bcl-6 silences the antiapoptotic molecule
Bcl-2 in GC B cells, ensuring the maintenance
of a proapoptotic state (58, 59). As we discuss
below, this state is of fundamental importance
for afﬁnity-based selection and the prevention
of autoimmunity that could arise as a result of
SHM. Second, by repressing the expression of
factors such as p53 and ATR, Bcl-6 contributes
to a GC B cell’s ability to tolerate DNA damage
induced by rapid proliferation and AID activity
(60, 61). Third, Bcl-6 plays an important role in
preserving GC B cell identity by silencing the
plasma cell master regulator Blimp-1, thus reg-
ulating exit from the GC to the plasma cell fate
(62). Finally, Bcl-6 downregulates the expres-
sion of key mediators of both B cell receptor
432
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 5 ---
BCR: B cell receptor
(BCR) and CD40 signaling, possibly helping to
ﬁne-tune the responsiveness of GC B cells to se-
lective signals (62, 63). The full range of genes
and processes controlled by Bcl-6 is currently
under investigation (63).
Phenotypic differences between light and
dark zone B cells. A long-standing question
is whether the anatomical polarization of the
GC into LZ and DZ corresponds to phenotypic
and/or functional polarization of the B cells in
these compartments (23, 27). Two key obser-
vations indicated that these compartments may
have distinct physiological functions. First, as
discussed below, FDCs act as long-term reser-
voirs of intact antigen (20, 21, 64); second, the
frequency of mitotic cells, as determined by his-
tological observation, is greater in the DZ (9).
Together, these ﬁndings suggested a model for
the GC reaction in which the DZ is the site
of B cell clonal expansion and antigen recep-
tor diversiﬁcation, whereas the LZ is the site
of selection by antigen binding (23). B cells in
the DZ were referred to as “centroblasts” be-
cause of their reported larger size and high-level
proliferative activity. To accommodate the idea
that cell division is segregated from selection,
centroblasts were proposed to migrate to the
LZ, after which they were thought to lose their
blastic features and differentiate into the more
quiescent and smaller “centrocyte” phenotype
(23).
Although many aspects of the initial model
are correct, experimental conﬁrmation of these
features was difﬁcult owing to the rather com-
plex microanatomy of the GC. Several attempts
were made to distinguish centroblasts and cen-
trocytes by ﬂow cytometry (65–67). The marker
most widely used for this purpose was CD77,
a surface glycolipid originally described as ex-
pressed on a highly proliferative subset of hu-
man GC B cells, proposed to correspond to
centroblasts (66). Despite the widespread use
of CD77 as a marker of DZ cells, a number of
studies failed to uncover functionally relevant
differences between CD77+ and CD77−GC
cells (68–70).
Direct observation of GC B cells in intact
mice (24, 26) or explanted lymphoid organs
in culture (25) provided important information
about the phenotype of LZ and DZ B cells.
Surprisingly, LZ and DZ populations were in-
distinguishable in terms of size and morphol-
ogy, and they showed similar dynamic behav-
ior, moving at virtually equal speeds (24, 25).
The only consistent difference between LZ and
DZ B cell dynamics was the slightly more lin-
ear paths of B cells in the LZ (24, 25), possi-
bly reﬂecting the higher density of CXCL13 in
this zone (25). Intravital imaging also showed
that a substantial number of naive B cells
from the mantle region are continually transit-
ing through the LZ (24). Thus, the small size at-
tributed to centrocytes by histologists may have
been due to the heterogeneity of the B cells
found in this zone, rather than being an intrinsic
property of LZ B cells. Together, these obser-
vations suggested that the differences between
LZ and DZ B cells were less marked than im-
plied by the terms centrocyte and centroblast,
and that these terms can be misleading (27).
A breakthrough in the deﬁnition of LZ
and DZ phenotypes came from work done
by the Cyster laboratory (71). Using genetic
and chemical approaches, Allen and colleagues
showed that the chemokine receptor CXCR4 is
responsible for retaining a subpopulation of GC
B cells in the DZ (71). DNA synthesis was sig-
niﬁcantly enriched among CXCR4-high cells,
suggesting that CXCR4 expression is a func-
tionally relevant marker for DZ B cells (25, 71).
A study proﬁling the gene expression of human
GC cells puriﬁed on the basis of CXCR4 ex-
pression was the ﬁrst to show distinct gene ex-
pression programs in putative DZ and LZ B
cells that corresponded to cell division in the
DZ and activation in the LZ (72). In the same
study, CD77 expression correlated poorly with
CXCR4 expression, further undermining the
validity of CD77 as a centroblast marker (72).
However, CXCR4 expression alone is insufﬁ-
cient to demarcate clearly distinct populations
of GC B cells by ﬂow cytometry, especially in
mouse (71). Furthermore, CXCR4 could not be
validated by histology as a marker for human
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
433
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 6 ---
DZ cells, possibly because the lower expression
of this receptor in LZ cells is mostly due to in-
ternalization rather than to lower expression at
the mRNA and protein levels (72).
These issues were resolved when in situ
photoactivation was used to label LZ and
DZ cell populations directly within intact
GCs (31). As predicted by the initial intravital
imaging studies (24), LZ and DZ cells were
indistinguishable in terms of size or complex-
ity, as determined by ﬂow-cytometric forward-
and side-scatter measurements. However, gene
expression analysis on puriﬁed LZ and DZ
populations showed that, despite extensive sim-
ilarities, the two subpopulations differed in a
number of important ways (31; also see below).
Among these differences, we identiﬁed two sur-
face markers—CD83 and CD86—that, when
combined with CXCR4, can clearly distinguish
between LZ and DZ cells by ﬂow cytometry:
LZ cells are CXCR4loCD83hiCD86hi, whereas
DZ cells are CXCR4hiCD83loCD86lo (31).
Use of these cell-surface markers and gene sig-
natures should allow for a more precise analysis
of GC development, of the mechanisms that
govern afﬁnity selection, and, possibly, of the
relationship between GC subpopulations and
human B cell malignancies.
Functional polarization in the germinal
center. Beyond their use as markers, upregula-
tion of CD83 and CD86 also indicated that GC
B cells in the LZ are in an activated state. This
was conﬁrmed by upregulation in the LZ of
other activation-related genes, including CD69
and a number of “immediate early” genes (Myc,
Nfkbia, Junb, Egr1-3, and Batf, among others)
(31). Global analysis of genes induced in LZ B
cells demonstrated the upregulation of the sig-
natures of CD40 and BCR stimulation as well as
of NF-κB and c-Myc engagement (31). These
observations located the regulation of B cell ac-
tivation to the LZ of the GC, supporting mod-
els in which positive selection of high-afﬁnity
mutants takes place in this compartment (23).
In contrast to selection, cell division was
classically thought to be restricted to the DZ of
the GC (23). This notion was based on direct
histological observation of mitotic ﬁgures (9)
and was supported by early H3-thymidine in-
corporation experiments in which labeled cells
appeared ﬁrst in the DZ (22). This distinction
was not entirely accepted, however, because
among other reasons, proliferation antigen
Ki67 can be readily detected in the LZ under
certain conditions, especially in mouse (73, 74).
In addition, cell division was occasionally seen
to occur in the LZ by intravital microscopy (25),
and short-term labeling with BrdU showed
rapid uptake in the LZ as well as the DZ (25,
26). This apparent discrepancy was resolved by
in situ photoactivation, which demonstrated
that, although GC B cells enter the S phase in
the LZ, cells in the G2/M phases of the cell
cycle are nearly absent from this compartment
(31). Consistent with this observation, G2/M
phase cell-cycle genes were strongly enriched
in the DZ when compared with the LZ. Thus,
although entry into the cell cycle can be
triggered in the LZ, B cells only rarely remain
in the LZ through the completion of the cycle.
A possible reason for this is that the signals
that induce B cells to enter the S phase of the
cell cycle also trigger their exit from the LZ,
either toward the DZ or to a post-GC fate (25,
31, 40). The signiﬁcance of the small number
of cells that appear to complete the cell cycle
in the LZ is unclear. However, these cells have
been reported primarily in GCs formed in
the presence of mitogen-containing adjuvants,
which may account for the phenomenon (75).
In summary, data obtained by in situ pho-
toactivation ﬁrmly establish that the GC is
functionally polarized into a DZ in which B
cells divide and a LZ in which B cells are ac-
tivated and selected based on their afﬁnity for
antigen. In contrast, other classical ideas, such
as the large size difference between centro-
cytes and centroblasts, were overturned. Fi-
nally, the deﬁnition of functionally relevant
markers is likely to shed light on the extent to
which phenomena such as selection-dependent
apoptosis, commitment to the plasma cell fate,
AID-dependent Ig diversiﬁcation, and develop-
ment of lymphoma are polarized between the
LZ and DZ of the GC.
434
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 7 ---
The Follicular Dendritic Cell Network
FDCs are radioresistant cells that form reticu-
lar networks in primary follicles and GCs (20,
32, 64, 76–78). In GCs, FDCs are concentrated
in the LZ, where they constitute the primary
anatomical marker for this zone in histology
and intravital microscopy (24, 26, 27, 77, 79)
(Figure 1a,b). FDCs retain antigen in intact
form on their surface for extended periods (21)
and are thus believed to serve as an antigen
reservoir during the GC reaction. According
to this model, B cells with antigen-speciﬁc re-
ceptors are selected by antigen displayed on the
FDC surface in the form of immune complexes
(23). In addition to their role as an antigen de-
pot, FDCs are thought to support GCs by se-
creting chemokines and cytokines that attract
and sustain GC B cells.
FDCs retain antigen on their surface in the
form of immune complex coated bodies, or ic-
cosomes (80). Immune complex trapping re-
lies primarily on complement receptors 1 and 2
(81). Although FDCs also express Fc receptor
IIB (FcRIIB), this receptor is dispensable for
antigen retention (81). Nevertheless, FcRIIB
expression by FDCs impacts on GC B cell de-
velopment and selection by reducing the effec-
tive number of Ig Fcs that can interact with
the inhibitory FcR expressed by GC B cells
(82). Even though FDC processes extend well
into the DZ of the GC, immune complex trap-
ping in vivo—as determined by staining with
the antibody FDC-M2, which binds to com-
plement component C4—is restricted to the
LZ (77).
In addition to antigen display, FDCs are
also thought to provide chemoattractant signals
that help localize B cells to the GC. FDCs pro-
duce the ligand for CXCR5, CXCL13/BLC
(32), which is the major chemoattractant for B
cells and follicular T cells (83, 84) and may also
play a role in LZ/DZ polarization (71). FDCs
also express other molecules essential to GC
maintenance, such as cytokines and integrin
ligands. For example, loss of expression of
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 adhesion molecules
by FDCs correlates with reduced GC size
and afﬁnity maturation (85). Finally, FDCs
produce an array of cytokines, most notably
IL-6 and BAFF, both of which may play a role
in the GC reaction (76, 86–89).
Although the balance of the evidence sug-
gests that FDCs play a major role in the GC,
the idea that FDCs or FDC-bound antigen
are absolutely required for GC development
and afﬁnity maturation has been challenged
(reviewed in References 90 and 91). Afﬁnity
maturation is seen to occur to a variable extent
in mice in which retention of antigen by FDCs
is defective. Mice with a genetic deletion of
the secreted form of IgM (92) or carrying a
transgene encoding only the membrane form
of anti-NP Ig (93) can form GCs, and show
signs of antigen-dependent selection at higher
antigen doses (50–100 μg), even in the absence
of detectable immune complex deposition on
FDCs. Cr2-deﬁcient mice, which lack comple-
ment receptors in both FDCs and B cells, are
also capable of forming GCs and of robust afﬁn-
ity maturation at higher antigen doses (50 μg),
but not at lower antigen doses or in the absence
of adjuvants (94, 95). In contrast to these mod-
els, mice lacking the lymphotoxin-α (LTα)
gene completely lack FDCs and are incapable of
forming GCs. Surprisingly, B cells in these mice
show some degree of afﬁnity maturation, even
though repeated immunization with high doses
of antigen (200 μg) is required (96). Together,
these models suggest that, although retention
of antigen by FDCs is essential to ensure afﬁnity
maturation under suboptimal conditions, this
retention may be less important when antigen
is widely available, especially within adjuvant
depots.
Germinal Center T Cells
Only a small fraction of the cells in GCs are
T cells; nevertheless, these cells are essential
for GC maintenance and for afﬁnity matura-
tion. Athymic nude mice fail to develop GCs
unless rescued by adoptively transferred thy-
mocytes prior to immunization (97). Injection
of antibodies that block the CD40-CD40L in-
teraction, a major pathway by which T helper
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
435
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 8 ---
cells deliver cognate help to B cells, is sufﬁcient
to dissolve an ongoing GC reaction (98). Like-
wise, humans with loss-of function mutations
in either CD40 or CD40L fail to develop GCs;
consequently, they have an excess of nonclass-
switched, low-afﬁnity serum antibody (99, 100).
Patients with such mutations are highly suscep-
tible to a multitude of bacterial and opportunis-
tic infections, highlighting the importance of
GCs to human health.
A speciﬁc population of GC T cells known
as T follicular helper (Tfh) cells have been un-
der intense investigation in recent years, and
a number of excellent reviews are available on
the subject (28, 30, 101, 102). Tfh cells were
originally deﬁned as CD4+ T cells that express
the chemokine receptor CXCR5, which is re-
quired for T cell entry into the B cell folli-
cle (32, 84, 103). In addition to CXCR5, Tfh
cells also express the CD28 family members
ICOS and PD-1 (84, 104), the cytokine IL-
21 (105), and, in humans, CD57 (106), among
other molecules. Tfh cell development in mice
is dependent on the expression of the transcrip-
tion factor Bcl-6 (107–109). Intravital imaging
studies have shown that access of T cells to GCs
is dependent on Bcl-6 expression, as well as on
the presence of the adaptor molecule SAP (110,
111). Although a set of markers that conclu-
sively distinguish between Tfh and other acti-
vated T cells has not been deﬁned (29), it is
clear that Tfh cells play a fundamental role in
the GC, as evidenced by studies showing that
GCs develop abnormally when this population
is altered (107, 109, 112–116).
Much less attention has been paid to other
populations of GC-resident T cells, includ-
ing CD8+ T cells (106), Th17 cells (117), and
Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (118–120, 120a), all
of which may play a role in positively or neg-
atively regulating the GC reaction. The kinet-
ics of appearance of the different GC-resident
T cell populations and how this relates to GC
progression are poorly deﬁned and may pro-
vide insights into how the GC reaction is con-
trolled. The role of Tfh cells in GC selection
is discussed in depth in subsequent sections of
this review.
Other Germinal Center Populations
In addition to T and B cells, GCs also contain
tingible-body macrophages (TBMs) and a small
population of conventional, bone marrow–
derived dendritic cells (cDCs). TBMs engulf
and eliminate apoptotic B cells that are fre-
quent products of GC selection (Figure 1d)
(38). Defects in TBM function have been re-
ported in patients with systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE) (121), and interfering with the
ability of TBM to dispose of dying cells can
lead to lupus-like disease (122, 123). Therefore,
TBMs may contribute to limiting the emer-
gence of autoreactivity in the GC.
The role of GC-resident cDCs is less well
understood. These cells were ﬁrst identiﬁed in
human tonsil by immunohistochemistry (36),
and CD11c+ cells with cDC morphology have
also been observed in mouse GCs by intravi-
tal microscopy using a CD11c-YFP transgenic
strain (Reference 37 and our unpublished ob-
servations). However, the function of these cells
in the GC has not yet been determined.
GERMINAL CENTER DYNAMICS
Intravital microscopy studies have clariﬁed the
events taking place before and during the GC
reaction. Cells previously thought to slowly
drift between the GC zones were instead found
to be constantly moving along convoluted paths
within the GC structure at a very rapid pace,
pausing momentarily only to divide (24–26). Si-
multaneously, advances in chemotaxis research
have clariﬁed how this movement is regulated
(47, 51, 71, 83, 124–126). Below, we discuss our
current understanding of B cell dynamics in the
GC, focusing primarily on migration between
the GC LZs and DZs and on how this migration
impacts afﬁnity-based selection.
Interzonal Migration
Selection in a GC where antigen is localized in
the LZ and cell proliferation in the DZ requires
that GC B cells transit between the two zones.
In a classic study, Hanna (22) pulse-labeled
cells in vivo using radiolabeled nucleotides and
436
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 9 ---
found that dividing cells appear ﬁrst in the DZ
and are detected in the LZ only several hours
later. Centrocytes were thus thought to be the
progeny of dividing centroblasts, suggesting a
model in which the latter were constantly giv-
ing rise to the former. Upon the discovery of
somatic mutation by Weigert (6, 7) and the ob-
servation that genetic variants arise in GCs (11,
12), it was proposed that the DZ functioned as
a source of the genetic variants that migrated to
the LZ to be selected by antigen displayed on
FDCs (23).
However, a simple model in which move-
ment of the centroblast progeny is unidirec-
tional from DZ to LZ would likely fall short
of explaining the remarkable efﬁciency of afﬁn-
ity maturation. First, the odds of achieving a
dramatic increase in afﬁnity by accumulation
of random mutations are exceedingly low, even
when considering the large number of mutants
generated in the course of a GC reaction (127,
128). Second, studies that reconstructed the
sequence of individual mutations leading to a
high-afﬁnity antibody showed that afﬁnity in-
creased in a stepwise fashion with each addi-
tional mutation, suggesting multiple rounds of
selection (129, 130). Together, these observa-
tions led Perelson and colleagues to propose
that B cells undergo iterative cycles of mutation
and selection in the GC, in a process termed
cyclic re-entry (127, 128). According to this
model, a fraction of B cells positively selected
in the LZ would return to the DZ for further
rounds of proliferation, mutation, and selection
in a cyclic fashion. This model accounts for both
the efﬁciency of afﬁnity maturation and its step-
wise nature (127, 128).
Despite the attractiveness of the cyclic re-
entry model, supporting evidence remained in-
direct until GCs were imaged by intravital mi-
croscopy (24–26). Three independent groups
directly observed bidirectional migration be-
tween the two GC zones. However, the small
number of events imaged and the limited obser-
vation time failed to reveal the net vector of mi-
gration from DZ to LZ predicted by cyclic re-
entry (24–26). Moreover, it was argued that the
low frequency of interzonal migration events
was not sufﬁcient to support a cyclic re-entry
model, suggesting instead a model in which se-
lection would occur in both LZ and DZ simul-
taneously (26, 131). Independent mathematical
analyses of the three sets of intravital imaging
data have questioned the validity of these ob-
jections (132) and suggested that more sophis-
ticated analysis of the data may reveal a net ﬂow
of cells from the DZ to the LZ (133). This issue
was resolved using in situ photoactivation to la-
bel GC B cells in the LZ or DZ directly (31).
This new labeling system allowed direct obser-
vation over periods of many hours, circumvent-
ing the need to track individual cells travers-
ing the LZ/DZ interface. The data uncovered
a strong net vector of migration toward the LZ:
Whereas up to 50% of DZ cells migrated from
to the LZ in 4 h, less than 10% of LZ migrated
in the opposite direction in the same period
of time. Mathematical treatment of these data
showed that this pattern corresponds to a frac-
tion of roughly 30% of GC B cells re-entering
the DZ after each round of LZ selection (31). In
addition, this study showed that clonal expan-
sioninvolves thereturnofB cells fromtheLZto
the DZ, providing further evidence of cyclic re-
entry (31). A further implication of these ﬁnd-
ings is that, rather than differentiating linearly
from “centroblasts” to “centrocytes” and then
to plasma or memory cells, GC B cells are con-
stantly shifting between what can be regarded
as two closely related but functionally distinct
states of a single population, which are associ-
ated with positioning in either LZ or DZ. True
differentiation according to this model would
be restricted to the positively selected B cells
that receive selective cues to exit into the post-
GC cell fates. Such a model is supported by the
relatively small differences between LZ and DZ
B cells with respect to size, dynamic behavior,
and gene expression (24–27, 31).
Positional Cues that Regulate
Positioning within the
Germinal Center
Many of the cues that regulate the posi-
tioning of GC cells in the LZ and the DZ
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
437
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 10 ---
have been elucidated. As noted previously, the
chemokine receptor CXCR4 is essential for po-
sitioning GC B cells in the DZ, and interfering
with this receptor either genetically or chem-
ically is sufﬁcient to disrupt LZ/DZ segrega-
tion (71). CXCR4hi GC cells are attracted by
the chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1, which is ex-
pressed at higher levels in the DZ than in the LZ
(71). Regulation of LZ positioning is somewhat
less clear. CXCR5-expressing B cells move to-
ward CXCL13, which is expressed by FDCs in
the LZ (32, 71). However, the difference in ex-
pression of CXCR5 between LZ and DZ B cells
is minimal (31). More importantly, although
mice deﬁcient in CXCR5/CXCL13 have ab-
normal follicle architecture (83, 124), GCs in
these mice have readily distinguishable LZs and
DZs (71). Thus, CXCR5 is not essential for GC
LZ/DZ polarization. Other G protein–coupled
receptors such as CCR6, Ebi2, and S1P3 are
also expressed more highly in LZ cells (31), and
they may play a redundant role to CXCR5 in
LZ positioning (133a).
Surprisingly, the GC reaction, and even
afﬁnity maturation, proceeds with little alter-
ation in the absence of either CXCR4 or
CXCR5 (51, 134, 135). These data suggest the
possibility that the interplay of chemoattrac-
tants and their receptors in the GC may not
be an essential requirement for the generation
and selection of high-afﬁnity B cell mutants. If
this is indeed the case, it will be interesting to
determine why such an elaborate pattern of mi-
gration has evolved and what the consequences
of its disruption may be.
In summary, the overall pattern of B cell mi-
gration within the GC is becoming increasingly
clear with the advent of intravital imaging and
the clariﬁcation of the roles of key chemoattrac-
tant receptors. A number of questions are still
open, however. Among these are the identity of
the signals that trigger migration from the LZ
to the DZ; the duration of the LZ/DZ cycle
and each of its steps, and how this may vary as a
consequence of afﬁnity; the number of rounds
of replication that a B cell will undergo in the
DZ before migrating back to the LZ, and how
this impacts DZ/LZ ratio; how cells exit the GC
after selection and how this exit is controlled;
how the signals that trigger selection are syn-
chronized with those triggering migration; and
ﬁnally, what the biological function is of GC
compartmentalization.
GERMINAL CENTER SELECTION
The selective survival and expansion of rare GC
B cell clones carrying somatic mutations ac-
count for the progressive increase in antibody
afﬁnity with time after immunization (5, 7, 8,
11). Although GC B cells do not secrete large
quantities of antibody, they contribute to long-
lived humoral responses by differentiating into
plasma cells and memory B cells. Thus, GC se-
lection involves survival, clonal expansion, and
cell fate decisions.
Importantly, the default fate for a GC cell
is to die by apoptosis (136). GC B cells ex-
press high levels of the death receptor Fas (41),
lose expression of the antiapoptotic molecule
Bcl-2 (137), and, when placed in culture, die
within a few hours (136). Survival requires sig-
nals that induce expression of antiapoptotic
proteins such as Mcl-1 (138) and cell prolif-
eration. In the framework of a cyclic re-entry
model, clonal expansion is intimately linked to
return from the LZ to the DZ for additional
cycles of proliferation and mutation. In addi-
tion, an unknown fraction of selected cells is
triggered to leave the GC reaction and differ-
entiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells or
memory B cells (see below). Finally, in addi-
tion to positive selection, GC B cells carrying
mutations that render them self-reactive may
be “negatively” selected (139–141) by a pro-
cess that appears to be defective in autoimmune
diseases (142, 143).
Selection for Recycling and Clonal
Expansion within the Germinal Center
Selective clonal expansion involves competi-
tion between B cells with different afﬁnities:
Whereas higher-afﬁnity cells are selectively
expanded, lower-afﬁnity cells are eliminated
by apoptosis, resulting in a GC in which B
438
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 11 ---
cell clones have an increasingly higher average
afﬁnity for the immunizing antigen (23, 144).
Once a B cell is in the GC, there is no known ab-
solute threshold for selection; instead, this pro-
cess operates on the basis of the relative afﬁnity
of competing clones. For example, in the ab-
sence of competition, B cells that express re-
ceptors with either high or low afﬁnity for the
hapten NP generate GCs with similar kinetics
and that grow to similar sizes (145). However,
low-afﬁnity cells are incapable of forming GCs
in the presence of higher-afﬁnity competitors
(145–147). Thus, lower-afﬁnity cells are capa-
ble of sensing and responding to the presence of
higher-afﬁnity competition; that is, there must
be some mode of information transfer, such that
“losing” cells are triggered to stop proliferating
or undergo apoptosis in the presence of “win-
ning” cells.
Exchange of information along these lines
is a common feature of many biological sys-
tems (148). For example, during development,
vertebrate neurons are produced in excess and
compete for limiting amounts of nerve growth
factors released by their target cells, and los-
ing neurons are induced to apoptose (148). This
communication can take place in different ways,
but a common theme seems to be the pres-
ence of a “limiting factor” that will allow only a
certain proportion of competing cells to sur-
vive. In the case of the GC, communication
between losing and winning cells was tradi-
tionally thought to occur by direct competition
for a limiting amount of antigen on the sur-
face of FDCs. According to this model, high-
afﬁnity cells would communicate their presence
to lower-afﬁnity cells either by consuming all
of the available antigen—working essentially as
an “antigen sink”—or, more likely, by “park-
ing” on, and blocking access to, the antigen-
rich sites on FDCs (136, 149, 150). In either
case, the amount of antigen available for lower-
afﬁnity cells would be insufﬁcient to trigger a
BCR signal capable of rescuing these cells from
apoptosis, leading to their elimination from the
GC. Follicular T cells would play an accessory
role, either providing survival signals to all cells
or differentiation signals to cells selected by the
antigen (151) (Figure 2a). An alternative to the
direct competition model is that the follicu-
lar T cells are the limiting factor in GC selec-
tion. According to this idea, the BCR captures
and mediates the internalization and processing
of differing amounts of antigen from FDCs in
proportion to its afﬁnity (152, 153), essentially
mapping BCR afﬁnity onto surface peptide-
MHC (pMHC) density. The signals provided
by direct BCR cross-linking by antigen would
be sufﬁcient to ensure the survival of all B cells
over a wide range of signal intensities, but only
those that display the highest levels of sur-
face pMHC would receive help from a limiting
number of GC-T cells. Thus, the T cell would
provide help selectively to B cells with higher
BCR afﬁnity (Figure 2b) (27, 101, 154, 155).
Both of these models highlight the distinc-
tion between survival and selection signals. Al-
though signals from both the BCR and T cells
are essential to maintain a GC reaction, in the-
ory only one limiting factor is required to en-
sure competition and afﬁnity maturation. For
example, a B cell that loses expression of its BCR
by hypermutation will die cell-autonomously
from lack of a BCR-mediated survival signal,
regardless of whether direct BCR stimulation
by antigen is the limiting factor in GC selec-
tion (Figure 2). Distinguishing survival signals
from limiting factors has been difﬁcult because,
irrespective of the model, both are dependent
on the BCR.
Direct selection by antigen. The idea that B
cells compete for signals induced by a limited
amount of antigen deposited on the FDC
surface originated with the very ﬁrst studies
of afﬁnity maturation, in which the extent of
the increase in antibody afﬁnity was shown
to be greater at lower antigen doses (5, 156,
157) (Figure 2a). Attractive as this model
may be, the mechanism by which it would
operate within the dynamic GC context is not
clear. In particular, it fails to account for the
intercellular communication of relative afﬁnity
levels that would be required for effective com-
petition. Whereas competition for BCR signals
explains why higher-afﬁnity B cells would
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
439
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 12 ---
?
ø
Death by
competition
Clonal 
expansion
Cell-autonomous
death
Antigen signal
No antigen
signal
No antigen
signal
Low
High
T
High
Low
T
ø
Death by
competition
Clonal 
expansion
Cell-autonomous
death
Antigen signal
Antigen signal
T cell 
signal
No T cell
signal
No antigen
signal
a  Competition for antigen binding
b  Competition for T cell help
Figure 2
Models for germinal center (GC) competition. (a) Direct competition for antigen binding. Higher-afﬁnity B cells (High) will take up all
available antigen ( yellow circles) or occupy all antigen-rich sites, preventing lower-afﬁnity B cells (Low) from receiving any antigen
signals through their B cell receptors (BCRs). This leads to expansion of higher-afﬁnity clones secondary to BCR binding and death of
lower-afﬁnity clones from lack of a BCR signal (red line). In this model, antigen is the limiting factor, and the role of the T cell (T) is
undeﬁned. (b) Competition for T cell help. Both high- and low-afﬁnity B cells bind antigen in an amount proportional to their BCR
afﬁnity. Both cells receive enough BCR signals to ensure survival, but higher-afﬁnity B cells acquire more antigen and present more
antigenic peptide on MHC-II (pMHC, yellow rectangles). Cells with higher pMHC compete favorably for a limiting number of helper T
cells, leading to their expansion. Lower-afﬁnity clones die from lack of T cell help owing to the sequestration of T cells by
higher-afﬁnity cells (red line). In this model, BCR signaling is essential for survival but not limiting, whereas T cells are the limiting
factor driving selection. Note that, in both models, cells that have lost BCR expression or whose BCRs no longer bind antigen above a
certain afﬁnity threshold (Ø) die from lack of BCR-mediated survival signals. Exchange of information between higher- and
lower-afﬁnity B cells is represented by red lines. Although in theory only one limiting factor is required for selection, these two models
are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
proliferate more vigorously than those with
lower afﬁnity, it does not provide any insight
into how the latter are prevented from prolifer-
ating or induced to apoptose by the presence of
the former, despite having sufﬁcient intrinsic
afﬁnity to respond to antigen. The idea that
higher-afﬁnity cells would “park” on antigen-
rich sites on FDCs in the LZ, thus blocking
the access of low-afﬁnity cells to these sites,
is not supported by live imaging, as B cells in
the GC fail to form prolonged, stable synapses
with antigen deposited on FDCs (24–26). An
additional theoretical consideration is that Ig
somatic mutation in GC B cells is random and
can create self-reactive cells (142, 143). Given
that the GC contains self-antigens, autoreactive
B cells would be positively selected if antigen
binding were the sole determinant of selection.
The precise role of the BCR in GC selec-
tion has been difﬁcult to deﬁne. Injection of
an antigen bolus during the GC reaction leads
to apoptosis and dissolution of the GC rather
than to positive selection (31, 139–141). How-
ever, soluble antigen delivered in this manner
may not assume the same physical characteris-
tics as FDC-bound immune complexes and is
therefore a poor model for the form of BCR
stimulation that would lead to selection in the
GC. In contrast, genetic experiments indicate
that afﬁnity maturation can occur, albeit to a
lesser extent, in the absence of the complement
receptor Cr2, serum antibody, and even FDCs,
provided that a source of free antigen such as an
alum depot is available (92–96). Thus, the exact
form of the antigen that would trigger produc-
tive BCR signaling is unclear.
440
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 13 ---
Genetic experiments in which BCR signal-
ing is modiﬁed are also difﬁcult to interpret,
in part because BCR expression is essential for
B cell survival (158) and because deletion or
mutation of regulators of BCR signaling of-
ten abrogate GC formation. For example, mice
lacking, or expressing hypomorphic mutants of,
CD19, CD21, Igβ, PI3K p110δ, Dock8, and
PLCγ2, among others, fail to develop, or de-
velop stunted, GCs and T-dependent antibody
responses (74, 159–166). Nevertheless, loss-of-
function studies have been important in eluci-
dating a role for BCR cross-linking in GC se-
lection. For example, mice with hypomorphic
mutations in CD19 or in the guanine exchange
factor Dock8, in which GCs are reduced but not
completely eliminated, show that BCR signals
are important for optimal afﬁnity maturation
(74, 160, 167). Likewise, infection of CD19-
deﬁcient mice with vesicular stomatitis virus, a
protocol that restores the appearance and main-
tenance of GCs, shows that afﬁnity matura-
tion is impaired in the absence of CD19 (168).
Conversely, deletion of FcγRIIb, a negative in-
hibitor of BCR signaling, leads to increased T-
dependent antibody titers, suggesting that, at a
minimum, the FcγRIIb pathway regulates the
differentiation of plasma cells, and possibly GC
selection as well (82, 169). A clue regarding the
mechanism by which the BCR may inﬂuence
selection comes from experiments with mice
deﬁcient in CD45, a coreceptor that increases
signaling through the BCR but does not affect
its endocytic capacity. Although BCR signal-
ing is altered in these mice, hypermutation and
selection appear to be unaffected. Thus, selec-
tion can proceed under conditions of impaired
BCR signaling, provided that antigen presenta-
tion remains unaltered (154, 170). In summary,
although the BCR is essential for GC B cell
survival and selection, the precise role of the
BCR in the GC reaction, including a distinc-
tion between its dual role as a signaling and an
endocytic receptor, remains to be determined.
Selection by T cell help. An alternative and
possibly complementary idea to direct antigen
stimulation through the BCR stipulates that
GC-resident T cells are the limiting factor in
afﬁnity-based selection (Figure 2b). There is
abundant indirect support for this model, both
theoretical and experimental, beginning with
the discovery that antibody responses require
T cell help (reviewed in Reference 171). In ad-
dition to experimental data, mathematical mod-
eling of the GC reaction based on available
multiphoton data and other theoretical consid-
erations (132, 155) indicate that only compe-
tition for T cells would be capable of achiev-
ing the levels of afﬁnity maturation encountered
experimentally.
A role for T cells in regulating and main-
taining the GC was uncovered experimentally
by blocking the CD40-CD40L interaction with
antagonistic antibodies to CD40L, which ter-
minates the GC reaction (98). Secreted prod-
ucts of helper T cells, including IL-21, are
also essential for normal GC development (172,
173). Consistent with these ﬁndings, GC size is
closely correlated with the availability of fol-
licular T cell help (115), and deregulation of
Tfh cells leads to inappropriate GC B cell se-
lection and humoral autoimmunity (112, 114,
116). One clue to how T cells select the high-
afﬁnity B cells was the observation that T cells
are able to discriminate among B cells on the
basis of the amount of pMHC displayed on the
cell surface (174). T cells synapse preferentially
with B cells with higher surface peptide density
in vitro (174). This idea was corroborated by in
vivo experiments showing that IL-4-producing
T helper cells are more likely to form doublets
with GC B cells bearing afﬁnity-increasing mu-
tations (175). Similarly, B cells deﬁcient in the
MHC-family molecule H2-O, a biochemical
inhibitor of peptide loading onto MHC class
II, outcompete H2-O-sufﬁcient B cells in mixed
knockout/wild-type GCs, even in conditions in
which BCR afﬁnity is equalized by forced ex-
pression of an NP-speciﬁc BCR (176). Finally,
selection by T cells would be expected to pro-
ceed even in the absence of FDC-bound im-
mune complexes, as long as another source of
antigen is available, a prediction that has been
conﬁrmed experimentally (92–96). These and
numerous other observations argue that helper
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
441
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 14 ---
T cells play an essential role in GC selection
and maintenance and that they may be a limit-
ing factor regulating which B cells are allowed
to progress in the GC.
Direct evidence for T cell–mediated selec-
tion was obtained by targeting T cell antigen to
GC B cells in a BCR-independent manner (31).
Ovalbumin (OVA) was targeted to GC B cells
using an antibody to the surface lectin DEC205,
which is highly expressed on activated B cells
(31). By injecting mice with chimeric antibod-
ies to DEC-205 fused to OVA (αDEC-OVA),
Victora and colleagues increased the pMHC
load
on
DEC-205-expressing
cells
while
bypassing BCR stimulation (31). Adminis-
tering this treatment to mice with ongoing
GCs containing both DEC205-sufﬁcient and
-deﬁcient B cells led to a dramatic increase in
the proportion of the former and virtual elimi-
nation of the latter, even though BCR afﬁnities
were equivalent in the two populations. Thus,
acutely skewing T cell help toward a subset
of GC B cells in a BCR-independent manner
leads to their robust selection, both for further
proliferation and for export from the GC as
plasmablasts (31). In a variation on this model,
wild-type mice with ongoing GC reactions
were injected with anti-DEC205-OVA. This
approach generated a situation in which all GC
B cells bore uniformly high surface pMHC
levels, essentially blinding GC T cells to B cell
afﬁnity. Under these conditions, GC selection
ceases to operate, and both serum afﬁnity
maturation and the selection of high-afﬁnity
mutants are abrogated, indicating that stronger
BCR cross-linking alone is not sufﬁcient to
ensure B cell selection (31). Thus, recent
experiments strongly support the view that T
cells are the limiting factor in GC selection.
Although the data discussed above em-
phasize the limiting role of the T cell in
afﬁnity-based selection, they do not suggest
that BCR stimulation is dispensable for the
GC reaction. BCR signaling plays an essential
role in ensuring GC persistence (159, 160,
170, 177, 178), and loss of BCR signaling
by nonsense or structurally compromising
mutations introduced during SHM is likely
to induce cell-autonomous B cell death in the
GC (Figure 2). The experiments discussed
above also do not necessarily exclude the
possibility of synergy between BCR signaling
and T cell help. Synergistic enhancement of B
cell survival by the BCR and CD40 pathways
has been documented in vitro (136), though
whether this happens in vivo, or what the
molecular mechanisms for such synergy would
be, is still not clear (179–181). Thus, even
though GC T cells appear to be the limiting
factor in afﬁnity-based selection, they may
work synergistically with signals emanating
from the BCR, Fc receptors, and possibly other
signaling pathways to enhance the efﬁciency of
clonal selection and afﬁnity maturation.
Open germinal centers. An intriguing fea-
ture of GC selection that has only recently be-
come apparent is that mature GCs are open to
invasion by B cells that were not present during
the initiation of the GC reaction (24, 34). In ad-
dition to the naive B cells that frequent the LZ
without participating in the GC reaction (24),
B cells with higher afﬁnity to the immunizing
antigen can efﬁciently colonize GCs, ultimately
replacing the lower-afﬁnity clones that initiated
the reaction (24). From the perspective of GC
selection, this means that high-afﬁnity clones
may be able to spread from one GC to another,
thus increasing the overall efﬁciency of afﬁnity
maturation. Although the presence of the same
B cell clone in more than one GC has been re-
ported to occur in human samples (182, 183),
alternative explanations such as a common pre-
GC or memory B cell precursor cannot be dis-
carded, and as such, no concrete evidence of
such “GC hopping” by high-afﬁnity clones is
currently available.
In addition to invasion by higher-afﬁnity
clones of the same speciﬁcity, ongoing GCs
can also be replaced by a completely differ-
ent antigen, provided that T cell help for
the second reaction is available (33). This
phenomenon, which is referred to as GC
reutilization, suggests a disconnect between
GC structure—as deﬁned microanatomically—
and the GC reaction—which refers to the
442
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 15 ---
temporally restricted expansion and contrac-
tion of B and T cell clones speciﬁc for phys-
ically linked epitopes. It also provides a new
perspective on GCs in sites prone to constant
antigenic stimulation, such as Peyer’s patches
and tonsils. In these sites, it is likely that GCs
are sequentially colonized by cells speciﬁc for
different antigens. This has implications for our
understanding of chronic GC reactions—such
as those found in HIV and certain parasites
with variable surface coats—and the process of
epitope spreading that is characteristic of cer-
tain humoral autoimmune diseases such as SLE
(33).
Selection for Export from the
Germinal Center
In addition to cyclic re-entry, positively se-
lected GC cells are exported from the GC
as plasmablasts—the precursors of the plasma
cells that will secrete antibody into serum and
secretions (184)—or as memory B cells, which,
upon re-exposure to antigen, will rapidly dif-
ferentiate into plasma cells (185) or re-enter
the GC reaction for further diversiﬁcation
(186, 187).
Selection into the plasma cell compartment.
Commitment to the plasma cell fate begins
while B cells are still in the GC. Blimp-1, the
master regulator of plasma cell differentiation,
is expressed by a small subset of GC cells be-
fore they are exported (126, 188, 189). Plasma
cells differ in terms of afﬁnity and hypermu-
tation from GC and memory cells. Whereas
the GC/memory compartments retain a frac-
tion of cells with lower afﬁnity for the NP hap-
ten, the afﬁnity of bone marrow plasma cells
is almost uniformly high (190). These differ-
ences are accentuated in mice transgenic for the
antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2, in which plasma
cell afﬁnity remains high despite less strin-
gent GC and memory cell selection, suggest-
ing a qualitative difference between selection
into the plasma cell versus the memory or recy-
cling compartments (191). These observations
have been conﬁrmed and extended by Brink
and colleagues, using an ingenious system in
which mice bearing a transgenically encoded
BCR speciﬁc for hen egg lysozyme (HEL) are
challenged with HEL mutants that bind to this
BCR with a range of afﬁnities (192–194). Im-
munization with low-afﬁnity HEL leads to the
appearance of a characteristic somatic mutation
(Y53D) in the transgenic BCR that increases its
afﬁnity by 80-fold. As in the NP system (190),
post-GC plasma cells are heavily dominated by
clones bearing the high-afﬁnity mutation, even
at a time point when this mutation is present
in only a small fraction of GC cells (193, 194).
Thus, unlike cyclic re-entry and memory cell
differentiation, selection into the plasma cell
compartment appears to favor cells with high
absolute BCR afﬁnity, rather than relying on
intercellular competition.
As with cyclic re-entry, the relative impor-
tance of signals delivered through the BCR
or by T cells to plasma cell differentiation
has not been resolved. Although short-lived
plasma cells can form very efﬁciently in T cell–
independent responses (195, 196), a number of
T cell–derived signals inﬂuence both the num-
bers and the afﬁnity of the plasma cell pool
in response to T-dependent antigens (197).
In vitro studies have deﬁned a clear molecu-
lar pathway by which ligation of CD40 can
lead to plasma cell differentiation. This path-
way involves CD40-mediated activation of the
NF-κB pathway and induction of the tran-
scription factor IRF4, leading to suppression of
Bcl-6 and, ultimately, to expression of Blimp-
1 and plasma cell differentiation (198–200). In
agreement with these data, in vivo studies in
which CD40 signaling is induced by either ag-
onistic antibodies or genetic approaches con-
sistently show that strong CD40 ligation in-
creases the magnitude of the short-lived plasma
cell response while curtailing the GC reaction
(201–205).
Work from our laboratory has shown that
increasing T cell help by targeting T cell anti-
gen to B cells through DEC-205 leads to a dra-
matic increase in their recruitment into both
pre- and post-GC plasma cell fates (31, 147).
However, unlike direct stimulation of CD40,
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
443
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 16 ---
DEC-205 targeting does not curtail the GC
reaction, but instead potently drives B cells to
recycle from the LZ to the DZ as well. Two
reasons for this discrepancy may be that CD40
stimulation alone fails to mimic the whole range
of signals exchanged between a follicular helper
T cell and a B cell (206) and that other signals
in addition to CD40 act in a dominant manner
to drive a fraction of selected B cells back into
the GC pathway. Alternatively, the decision to
become a plasma cell upon CD40 ligation may
be dose dependent, in which case the GC path-
way is inhibited only by the supraphysiological
levels of CD40 stimulation seen in CD40 trans-
genic or anti-CD40-treated mice. Evidence in
favor of the latter is provided by data show-
ing that transgenic T helper cells speciﬁc for a
BCR-derived peptide direct GC B cells express-
ing this BCR preferentially to the plasma cell
compartment, while preventing GC recycling
and memory cell differentiation (207). Thus,
supraphysiological T cell help triggers plasma
cell differentiation even in the presence of the
full complement of signals delivered by T cell
help in vivo.
In addition to CD40, other T cell–derived
signals can affect plasma cell differentiation in
vivo. Mice lacking the surface receptor PD-1
or its ligands PD-L1 or PD-L2 have reduced
numbers of plasma cells in both spleen and bone
marrow, in a process that is B cell intrinsic.
Though fewer in number, the resulting plasma
cells are of higher afﬁnity, suggesting more
stringent selection of B cells by Tfh cells in the
absence of this axis (208). Similarly, mice lack-
ing IL-21 or the IL-21 receptor show decreased
numbers of plasma cells, though these cells are
of decreased rather than increased afﬁnity (172).
Interestingly, lack of PD-1 signaling leads to re-
duced production of IL-21 by follicular T cells
(208), possibly providing a link between these
two phenotypes.
Selection into the memory B cell com-
partment. Selection into the memory B cell
compartment is the least understood of all the
cell fate decisions made in the GC (197, 209).
Memory cells can be generated from T-B cell
interactions in a GC-independent manner
(210, 211) as well as during T-independent B
cell responses (212). Nonetheless, the majority
of memory cells in wild-type mice responding
to T-dependent antigens are likely to arise
from the GC reaction, and the classic deﬁnition
of memory B cell includes the presence of
SHM in Ig genes (185).
Class-switched memory cells are indistin-
guishable from GC cells in terms of afﬁnity and
number of somatic mutations, although both
are of lower afﬁnity than plasma cells (190, 191).
A recent review of the effects of a wide vari-
ety of genetic or chemical perturbations on GC
and memory B cells shows that, overall, defects
in the selection of GC cells are mirrored by
defects in memory B cells, while often differ-
ing from effects in plasma cells (197). A possi-
ble interpretation of these observations is that,
unlike plasma cells, memory B cells differen-
tiate stochastically from among positively se-
lected GC cells, and simply surviving apoptosis
is sufﬁcient for memory B cell differentiation.
In support of this hypothesis, forced expression
of Bcl-2 leads to an up to 20-fold increase in
the number of IgG+ GC/memory cells after
immunization and to a marked decrease in the
efﬁciency of selection of both memory and GC
cells but not of plasma cells (213). Similarly,
deletion of the proapoptotic receptor Fas leads
to impaired selection in both GC and memory
compartments (214). On the other hand, stud-
ies in mice deﬁcient in the cytokine IL-21 or
its receptor show an accumulation of memory
cells concomitant with a reduction in GC cell
numbers (172, 173). These memory cells are
enriched in germline Ig sequences, suggesting
that their precursors spent little if any time in
the GC (172), which is in agreement with the
notion that memory cells emerge early in the
GC response (197). Thus, although memory B
cells appear to be selected according to similar
rules as recycling GC cells, how the decision is
made to remain in the GC or exit as a memory
cell remains poorly understood.
In summary, the available data on the dif-
ferentiation of GC B cells along the memory
or plasma cell fates suggest that, whereas very
444
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 17 ---
high-afﬁnity cells have an increased probabil-
ity of being directed to the plasma cell fate,
lower-afﬁnity cells that pass positive selection
can be directed into either the memory or re-
cycling GC cell pools, in a decision that may
be inﬂuenced by factors such as timing and the
presence of IL-21. The recent development of
strategies to trigger plasma cell differentiation
from GC cells acutely (31) and to trace post-GC
cells in vivo (186, 187) may help further our
understanding of how these cells are selected
within the GC.
Negative Selection
in the Germinal Center
Because Ig SHM is random, there is a contin-
ual risk of producing autoreactive GC B cells.
Therefore, GC reactions must include one or
more checkpoints for removing the autoreac-
tive B cells generated by SHM. These check-
points are defective in patients that produce
pathogenic autoantibodies (142, 143). Accord-
ingly, high-afﬁnity anti-DNA antibodies in hu-
man SLE patients are often heavily mutated
(215, 216), and anti-dsDNA antibodies found in
murine lupus models arise through SHM (217).
Data obtained from human subjects by
antibody cloning also provide evidence for
the emergence of self-reactivity by SHM. Al-
though polyreactive and/or self-reactive BCRs
are largely purged from the human naive B
cell repertoire by checkpoints operating during
B cell development (218), weakly self-reactive
receptors are commonly found among mem-
ory B cells in healthy individuals (219) and are
enriched in post-GC B cells in HIV-infected
individuals (220). Artiﬁcial reversion of these
antibodies to their germline conﬁguration is
sufﬁcient to eliminate auto/polyreactivity, in-
dicating that these properties emerge through
hypermutation in the GC (219). Reversion to
germline also eliminates the self-reactivity of
most high-afﬁnity autoantibodies from patients
with SLE (216), indicating that both the low-
afﬁnity autoantibodies found in normal indi-
viduals and the pathogenic, high-afﬁnity anti-
bodies of SLE patients arise as by-products of
hypermutation. These data, therefore, suggest
the existence of a checkpoint within or after the
GC that is capable of eliminating high-afﬁnity
self-reactive mutants from healthy individuals.
Direct evidence for deletion of autoreactive
cells in GCs comes from experiments with
B cells that express a transgenic antigen
receptor with dual speciﬁcity for the hapten
p-azophenylarsonate
and
for
nuclear
self-
antigens. B cells with this speciﬁcity are actively
eliminated in the GC, but they can be rescued
by overexpression of Bcl-2 (221), implicating B
cell apoptosis as an important mediator of GC-
negative selection. The precise nature of the
checkpoints that control the emergence of B
cell autoreactivity in the GC are still debated. A
variety of genetic defects can lead to GC dereg-
ulation and to the development of high-afﬁnity
autoantibodies (112, 114, 116, 217, 222–227).
These checkpoints are thought to operate
at both the B cell and T cell levels. B cell–
intrinsic checkpoints include expression of the
inhibitory Fc receptor FcγRIIb, the inhibitory
BCR coreceptor CD22, and the downstream
BCR signaling molecule lyn (82, 222–224, 226,
227). On the T cell side, humoral autoreactivity
arises from defects in regulation of GC Tfh
populations, either intrinsic to the Tfh cell
(112, 225) or dependent on its interactions with
regulatory CD4 or CD8 cells in the periphery
(114, 116, 119, 120, 120a). The defect in the
Fas/Fas ligand axis that leads to autoimmunity
in the lpr and gld mutant mice (217, 228) or in
humans to autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome (229, 230) appears to operate syn-
ergistically on both B and T cells (231, 232). A
caveat of some of these genetic systems is that
autoantibody-inducing mutations are present
in either B or T cells throughout their entire
development and not only during the GC
reaction. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to pinpoint
these defects solely to the GC as opposed to
the bone marrow or to the early stages of B
cell activation by antigen or T cells. The use
of conditional targeting approaches that delete
genes speciﬁcally in the GC—as done in the
case of Fas (231)—should help clarify this
issue.
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
445
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 18 ---
B
B
T
B
Survival signal
(non-limiting)
Proliferation,
hypermutation
Recycling
Memory cell (?)
Light zone
Dark zone
CD86
CD83
Bm
FDC
B
B
T
CXCR4
CXCR5
AID
Polη
Ø BCR
DNA damage
Ø affinity
pMHC
Plasma cell
Selection signal
(limiting)
Entry into GC
(competitive)
a
b
c
d
pMHC
pMHC
pMHC
Germinal center
Figure 3
Proposed model for afﬁnity-based selection in the GC. (a) B cells compete for a limiting number of T cells at
the T:B border; only the cells with the highest afﬁnity are allowed to enter the GC reaction. (b) GC cells in
the dark zone (DZ) proliferate and turn on the somatic hypermutation machinery, which includes the
enzymes AID and Polη. These cells are maintained in the DZ by high expression of chemokine receptor
CXCR4. Cells that introduce mutations that impair BCR expression at this point (Ø BCR) die owing to the
lack of a BCR signal. After one (or potentially more) cycles of division/mutation, surviving DZ B cells
migrate toward the light zone (LZ), in a process that involves upregulation of chemokine receptor CXCR5.
(c) B cells interact with antigen in immune complexes on FDCs. B cells with very low or no afﬁnity for
antigen (Ø afﬁnity) may also die from lack of a BCR signal at this step. Antigen signals are not limiting at this
point, and all B cells transiting to the LZ upregulate CD83 and CD86. BCR afﬁnity determines the level of
peptide-MHC (pMHC, red rectangles) on the B cell surface. (d ) B cells present antigen to a limiting number
of T helper cells. B cells with higher pMHC interact preferentially with T cells, preventing their interaction
with lower-afﬁnity B cells, in a competitive process. B cells that successfully interact with T helper cells can
then follow three potential fates: recycling, with upregulation of CXCR4 and re-entry into the DZ for
further proliferation/mutation; exit from the GC into the plasma cell fate (likely under conditions of high
afﬁnity/pMHC density); or exit into the memory B cell fate. The latter possibility has not yet been shown to
be enhanced by interaction with T helper cells. In different points during this process, B cells that develop
strongly autoreactive BCRs are eliminated by multiple checkpoints, which may be B cell intrinsic or T cell
dependent (not shown). Abbreviations: AID, activation-induced cytidine deaminase; BCR, B cell receptor;
DZ, dark zone; FDC, follicular dendritic cell; GC, germinal center; LZ, light zone. Arrow width represents
the proportion of cells thought to follow a given path. Dashed arrows represent likely events for which the
available data are inconclusive.
446
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 19 ---
Regardless of mechanism, the diversity of
the available mouse models of humoral au-
toimmunity argues for the existence of multi-
ple checkpoints operating during or even af-
ter the GC reaction. It is also clear that these
checkpoints are not entirely redundant, because
genetically overriding a single T or B cell–
intrinsic checkpoint is often sufﬁcient to in-
duce autoimmune disease. As is the case for
positive selection, checkpoints for autoreactiv-
ity that are B cell intrinsic likely act in concert
with checkpoints involving T cells and other
cells so as to limit the generation of high-afﬁnity
autoantibodies by SHM.
Selection for Access
to the Germinal Center
Classical studies using chimeric animals or si-
multaneous immunization with two different
haptens suggested that GCs are initially col-
onized by a very small number of high-afﬁnity
precursors, maybe as few as one to three cells
(10, 40, 233). By contrast, even cells with very
low afﬁnity for antigen are intrinsically capable
of forming GCs under noncompetitive condi-
tions (145–147). Likewise, many high-afﬁnity
somatically hypermutated antibodies to HIV
cloned from patients have very low afﬁnity for
antigen when reverted to their germline con-
ﬁguration (220, 234). Thus, the absolute afﬁn-
ity threshold required for triggering the B cell
GC program must be very low, indicating that
a large number of naive B cells in a polyclonal
repertoire have the cell-intrinsic potential to
enter the GC reaction. By studying competi-
tion between B cells with high and low afﬁnity
for the hapten NP (145, 196), we have recently
shown that entry into the GC is a competitive
process and that presence of high-afﬁnity com-
petitors inhibits the proliferation and activation
of lower-afﬁnity B cells prior to GC coalescence
(147). Intravital imaging and DEC205 target-
ing of T cell antigen (as described in Selection
by T Cell Help, above) showed that, as in the
GC, competition at the pre-GC stage is also
mediated by a limiting number of helper T cells
(147). Further investigation of afﬁnity-based se-
lection prior to the GC should lead to a greater
understanding of the selection of B cell clones
that found the GC reaction and may inform fu-
ture vaccine design.
CONCLUSION
Nearly two decades have passed since the
emergence of a model for the GC reaction
that accounts for afﬁnity maturation (23). On
the basis of data that have become available
in the interim, we propose an updated model
of the GC in which competition for T cells is
the driving force behind B cell selection and
afﬁnity maturation (Figure 3). According to
the revised model, signals received by B cells
through their BCRs are essential for survival, in
a cell-intrinsic process that, though capable of
distinguishing between ligands with differing
afﬁnities, is not sensitive to the presence
of higher-afﬁnity competitors. In contrast,
engagement with a limiting number of T cells,
before and during the GC reaction, is directly
competitive and ensures the positive selection
of only B cell clones with the highest afﬁnity for
antigen. This selection process is exquisitely
synchronized with cyclic migration of B cells
between the two GC compartments, prolifer-
ation taking place in the DZ and selection in
the LZ. The years to come will most certainly
generate a wealth of data that will further our
understanding of the processes by which GCs
ensure the robust generation of high-afﬁnity
antibodies while limiting the emergence of
pathogenic
self-antibodies
and
malignant
transformation.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
447
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 20 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all members of the Nussenzweig lab for their helpful comments and suggestions.
LITERATURE CITED
1. Hozumi N, Tonegawa S. 1976. Evidence for somatic rearrangement of immunoglobulin genes coding
for variable and constant regions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73:3628–32
2. Talmage DW. 1957. Allergy and immunology. Annu. Rev. Med. 8:239–56
3. Burnet FM. 2007. A modiﬁcation of Jerne’s theory of antibody production using the concept of clonal
selection. Nat. Immunol. 8:1024–26. Reprinted from 1957. Aust. J. Sci. 20:67–69
4. Jerne NK. 1951. A study of avidity based on rabbit skin responses to diphtheria toxin-antitoxin mixtures.
Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand. Suppl. 87:1–183
5. Eisen HN, Siskind GW. 1964. Variations in afﬁnities of antibodies during the immune response.
Biochemistry 3:996–1008
6. Weigert MG, Cesari IM, Yonkovich SJ, Cohn M. 1970. Variability in the lambda light chain sequences
of mouse antibody. Nature 228:1045–47
7. McKean D, Huppi K, Bell M, Staudt L, Gerhard W, Weigert M. 1984. Generation of antibody diversity
in the immune response of BALB/c mice to inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
81:3180–84
8. Berek C, Milstein C. 1987. Mutation drift and repertoire shift in the maturation of the immune response.
Immunol. Rev. 96:23–41
9. Nieuwenhuis P, Opstelten D. 1984. Functional anatomy of germinal centers. Am. J. Anat. 170:421–35
10. Jacob J, Kassir R, Kelsoe G. 1991. In situ studies of the primary immune response to (4-hydroxy-
3-nitrophenyl)acetyl. I. The architecture and dynamics of responding cell populations. J. Exp. Med.
173:1165–75
11. Jacob J, Kelsoe G, Rajewsky K, Weiss U. 1991. Intraclonal generation of antibody mutants in germinal
centres. Nature 354:389–92
12. Berek C, Berger A, Apel M. 1991. Maturation of the immune response in germinal centers. Cell 67:1121–
29
13. Muramatsu M, Kinoshita K, Fagarasan S, Yamada S, Shinkai Y, Honjo T. 2000. Class switch recom-
bination and hypermutation require activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a potential RNA
editing enzyme. Cell 102:553–63
14. Neuberger MS, Lanoue A, Ehrenstein MR, Batista FD, Sale JE, Williams GT. 1999. Antibody di-
versiﬁcation and selection in the mature B-cell compartment. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol.
64:211–16
15. Nussenzweig A, Nussenzweig MC. 2010. Origin of chromosomal translocations in lymphoid cancer.
Cell 141:27–38
16. Pavri R, Nussenzweig MC. 2011. AID targeting in antibody diversity. Adv. Immunol. 110:1–26
17. Pavri R, Gazumyan A, Jankovic M, Di Virgilio M, Klein I, et al. 2010. Activation-induced cytidine
deaminase targets DNA at sites of RNA polymerase II stalling by interaction with Spt5. Cell 143:122–
33
18. Yamane A, Resch W, Kuo N, Li Z, Sun H, et al. 2010. Deep-sequencing reveals the genomic targets
of activation-induced deaminase in activated B cells. Nat. Immunol. 12:62–69
19. Basu U, Meng FL, Keim C, Grinstein V, Pefanis E, et al. 2011. The RNA exosome targets the AID
cytidine deaminase to both strands of transcribed duplex DNA substrates. Cell 144:353–63
20. Mandel TE, Phipps RP, Abbot A, Tew JG. 1980. The follicular dendritic cell: long-term antigen
retention during immunity. Immunol. Rev. 53:29–59
21. Mandel TE, Phipps RP, Abbot AP, Tew JG. 1981. Long-term antigen retention by dendritic cells in
the popliteal lymph node of immunized mice. Immunology 43:353–62
22. Hanna MG Jr. 1964. An autoradiographic study of the germinal center in spleen white pulp during
early intervals of the immune response. Lab. Investig. 13:95–104
23. MacLennan IC. 1994. Germinal centers. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12:117–39
448
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 21 ---
24. Schwickert TA, Lindquist RL, Shakhar G, Livshits G, Skokos D, et al. 2007. In vivo imaging of germinal
centres reveals a dynamic open structure. Nature 446:83–87
25. Allen CD, Okada T, Tang HL, Cyster JG. 2007. Imaging of germinal center selection events during
afﬁnity maturation. Science 315:528–31
26. Hauser AE, Junt T, Mempel TR, Sneddon MW, Kleinstein SH, et al. 2007. Deﬁnition of germinal-
center B cell migration in vivo reveals predominant intrazonal circulation patterns. Immunity 26:655–67
27. Allen CD, Okada T, Cyster JG. 2007. Germinal-center organization and cellular dynamics. Immunity
27:190–202
28. King C, Tangye SG, Mackay CR. 2008. T follicular helper [TFH] cells in normal and dysregulated
immune responses. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 26:741–66
29. Yu D, Vinuesa CG. 2010. The elusive identity of T follicular helper cells. Trends Immunol. 31:377–83
30. Crotty S. 2011. Follicular helper CD4 T cells (TFH). Annu. Rev. Immunol. 29:621–63
31. Victora GD, Schwickert TA, Fooksman DR, Kamphorst AO, Meyer-Hermann M, et al. 2010. Germinal
center dynamics revealed by multiphoton microscopy with a photoactivatable ﬂuorescent reporter. Cell
143:592–605
32. Cyster JG, Ansel KM, Reif K, Ekland EH, Hyman PL, et al. 2000. Follicular stromal cells and lym-
phocyte homing to follicles. Immunol. Rev. 176:181–93
33. Schwickert TA, Alabyev B, Manser T, Nussenzweig MC. 2009. Germinal center reutilization by newly
activated B cells. J. Exp. Med. 206:2907–14
34. Suzuki K, Grigorova I, Phan TG, Kelly LM, Cyster JG. 2009. Visualizing B cell capture of cognate
antigen from follicular dendritic cells. J. Exp. Med. 206:1485–93
35. Kelsoe G. 1996. The germinal center: a crucible for lymphocyte selection. Semin. Immunol. 8:179–84
36. Grouard G, Durand I, Filgueira L, Banchereau J, Liu YJ. 1996. Dendritic cells capable of stimulating
T cells in germinal centres. Nature 384:364–67
37. Lindquist RL, Shakhar G, Dudziak D, Wardemann H, Eisenreich T, et al. 2004. Visualizing dendritic
cell networks in vivo. Nat. Immunol. 5:1243–50
38. Fliedner T. 1967. On the origin of tingible bodies in germinal centers in immune responses. In Germinal
Centers in Immune Responses, ed. H Cottier, pp. 218–24. Berlin: Springer-Verlag
39. Zhang J, MacLennan IC, Liu YJ, Lane PJ. 1988. Is rapid proliferation in B centroblasts linked to
somatic mutation in memory B cell clones? Immunol. Lett. 18:297–99
40. Liu YJ, Zhang J, Lane PJ, Chan EY, MacLennan IC. 1991. Sites of speciﬁc B cell activation in pri-
mary and secondary responses to T cell-dependent and T cell-independent antigens. Eur. J. Immunol.
21:2951–62
41. Yoshino T, Kondo E, Cao L, Takahashi K, Hayashi K, et al. 1994. Inverse expression of bcl-2 protein
and Fas antigen in lymphoblasts in peripheral lymph nodes and activated peripheral blood T and B
lymphocytes. Blood 83:1856–61
42. Cervenak L, Magyar A, Boja R, Laszlo G. 2001. Differential expression of GL7 activation antigen on
bone marrow B cell subpopulations and peripheral B cells. Immunol. Lett. 78:89–96
43. Naito Y, Takematsu H, Koyama S, Miyake S, Yamamoto H, et al. 2007. Germinal center marker GL7
probes activation-dependent repression of N-glycolylneuraminic acid, a sialic acid species involved in
the negative modulation of B-cell activation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27:3008–22
44. Rose ML, Birbeck MS, Wallis VJ, Forrester JA, Davies AJ. 1980. Peanut lectin binding properties of
germinal centres of mouse lymphoid tissue. Nature 284:364–66
45. Bhan AK, Nadler LM, Stashenko P, McCluskey RT, Schlossman SF. 1981. Stages of B cell differenti-
ation in human lymphoid tissue. J. Exp. Med. 154:737–49
46. Oliver AM, Martin F, Kearney JF. 1997. Mouse CD38 is down-regulated on germinal center B cells
and mature plasma cells. J. Immunol. 158:1108–15
47. Gatto D, Paus D, Basten A, Mackay CR, Brink R. 2009. Guidance of B cells by the orphan G protein-
coupled receptor EBI2 shapes humoral immune responses. Immunity 31:259–69
48. Pereira JP, Kelly LM, Xu Y, Cyster JG. 2009. EBI2 mediates B cell segregation between the outer and
centre follicle. Nature 460:1122–26
49. Hannedouche S, Zhang J, Yi T, Shen W, Nguyen D, et al. 2011. Oxysterols direct immune cell migration
via EBI2. Nature 475:524–27
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
449
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 22 ---
50. Liu C, Yang XV, Wu J, Kuei C, Mani NS, et al. 2011. Oxysterols direct B-cell migration through EBI2.
Nature 475:519–23
51. Green JA, Suzuki K, Cho B, Willison LD, Palmer D, et al. 2011. The sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor
S1P2 maintains the homeostasis of germinal center B cells and promotes niche conﬁnement. Nat.
Immunol. 12:672–80
52. Klein U, Dalla-Favera R. 2008. Germinal centres: role in B-cell physiology and malignancy. Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 8:22–33
53. Basso K, Dalla-Favera R. 2010. BCL6: master regulator of the germinal center reaction and key onco-
gene in B cell lymphomagenesis. Adv. Immunol. 105:193–210
54. Cattoretti G, Chang CC, Cechova K, Zhang J, Ye BH, et al. 1995. BCL-6 protein is expressed in
germinal-center B cells. Blood 86:45–53
55. Onizuka T, Moriyama M, Yamochi T, Kuroda T, Kazama A, et al. 1995. BCL-6 gene product, a 92-
to 98-kD nuclear phosphoprotein, is highly expressed in germinal center B cells and their neoplastic
counterparts. Blood 86:28–37
56. Ye BH, Cattoretti G, Shen Q, Zhang J, Hawe N, et al. 1997. The BCL-6 proto-oncogene controls
germinal-centre formation and Th2-type inﬂammation. Nat. Genet. 16:161–70
57. Dent AL, Shaffer AL, Yu X, Allman D, Staudt LM. 1997. Control of inﬂammation, cytokine expression,
and germinal center formation by BCL-6. Science 276:589–92
58. Ci W, Polo JM, Cerchietti L, Shaknovich R, Wang L, et al. 2009. The BCL6 transcriptional program
features repression of multiple oncogenes in primary B cells and is deregulated in DLBCL. Blood
113:5536–48
59. Saito M, Novak U, Piovan E, Basso K, Sumazin P, et al. 2009. BCL6 suppression of BCL2 via Miz1
and its disruption in diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106:11294–99
60. Phan RT, Dalla-Favera R. 2004. The BCL6 proto-oncogene suppresses p53 expression in germinal-
centre B cells. Nature 432:635–39
61. Ranuncolo SM, Polo JM, Dierov J, Singer M, Kuo T, et al. 2007. Bcl-6 mediates the germinal center
B cell phenotype and lymphomagenesis through transcriptional repression of the DNA-damage sensor
ATR. Nat. Immunol. 8:705–14
62. Shaffer AL, Yu X, He Y, Boldrick J, Chan EP, Staudt LM. 2000. BCL-6 represses genes that function
in lymphocyte differentiation, inﬂammation, and cell cycle control. Immunity 13:199–212
63. Basso K, Saito M, Sumazin P, Margolin AA, Wang K, et al. 2010. Integrated biochemical and computa-
tional approach identiﬁes BCL6 direct target genes controlling multiple pathways in normal germinal
center B cells. Blood 115:975–84
64. Tew JG, Phipps RP, Mandel TE. 1980. The maintenance and regulation of the humoral immune
response: persisting antigen and the role of follicular antigen-binding dendritic cells as accessory cells.
Immunol. Rev. 53:175–201
65. Kremmidiotis G, Zola H. 1995. Changes in CD44 expression during B cell differentiation in the human
tonsil. Cell Immunol. 161:147–57
66. Fyfe G, Cebra-Thomas JA, Mustain E, Davie JM, Alley CD, Nahm MH. 1987. Subpopulations of B
lymphocytes in germinal centers. J. Immunol. 139:2187–94
67. Feuillard J, Taylor D, Casamayor-Palleja M, Johnson GD, MacLennan IC. 1995. Isolation and char-
acteristics of tonsil centroblasts with reference to Ig class switching. Int. Immunol. 7:121–30
68. Klein U, Tu Y, Stolovitzky GA, Keller JL, Haddad J Jr, et al. 2003. Transcriptional analysis of the B
cell germinal center reaction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:2639–44
69. Hogerkorp CM, Borrebaeck CA. 2006. The human CD77- B cell population represents a heterogeneous
subset of cells comprising centroblasts, centrocytes, and plasmablasts, prompting phenotypical revision.
J. Immunol. 177:4341–49
70. Nakayama Y, Stabach P, Maher SE, Mahajan MC, Masiar P, et al. 2006. A limited number of genes are
involved in the differentiation of germinal center B cells. J. Cell Biochem. 99:1308–25
71. Allen CD, Ansel KM, Low C, Lesley R, Tamamura H, et al. 2004. Germinal center dark and light zone
organization is mediated by CXCR4 and CXCR5. Nat. Immunol. 5:943–52
72. Caron G, Le Gallou S, Lamy T, Tarte K, Fest T. 2009. CXCR4 expression functionally discriminates
centroblasts versus centrocytes within human germinal center B cells. J. Immunol. 182:7595–602
450
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 23 ---
73. Camacho SA, Kosco-Vilbois MH, Berek C. 1998. The dynamic structure of the germinal center.
Immunol. Today 19:511–14
74. Wang Y, Carter RH. 2005. CD19 regulates B cell maturation, proliferation, and positive selection in
the FDC zone of murine splenic germinal centers. Immunity 22:749–61
75. Cyster JG. 2010. Shining a light on germinal center B cells. Cell 143:503–5
76. Kosco-Vilbois MH, Scheidegger D. 1995. Follicular dendritic cells: antigen retention, B cell activation,
and cytokine production. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 201:69–82
77. Allen CD, Cyster JG. 2008. Follicular dendritic cell networks of primary follicles and germinal centers:
phenotype and function. Semin. Immunol. 20:14–25
78. El Shikh ME, El Sayed RM, Sukumar S, Szakal AK, Tew JG. 2010. Activation of B cells by antigens
on follicular dendritic cells. Trends Immunol. 31:205–11
79. Hardie DL, Johnson GD, Khan M, MacLennan IC. 1993. Quantitative analysis of molecules which
distinguish functional compartments within germinal centers. Eur. J. Immunol. 23:997–1004
80. Szakal AK, Gieringer RL, Kosco MH, Tew JG. 1985. Isolated follicular dendritic cells: cytochemical
antigen localization, Nomarski, SEM, and TEM morphology. J. Immunol. 134:1349–59
81. Barrington RA, Pozdnyakova O, Zafari MR, Benjamin CD, Carroll MC. 2002. B lymphocyte memory:
role of stromal cell complement and FcγRIIB receptors. J. Exp. Med. 196:1189–99
82. Ravetch JV, Lanier LL. 2000. Immune inhibitory receptors. Science 290:84–89
83. Forster R, Mattis AE, Kremmer E, Wolf E, Brem G, Lipp M. 1996. A putative chemokine receptor,
BLR1, directs B cell migration to deﬁned lymphoid organs and speciﬁc anatomic compartments of the
spleen. Cell 87:1037–47
84. Haynes NM, Allen CD, Lesley R, Ansel KM, Killeen N, Cyster JG. 2007. Role of CXCR5 and CCR7
in follicular Th cell positioning and appearance of a programmed cell death gene-1high germinal center-
associated subpopulation. J. Immunol. 179:5099–108
85. Victoratos P, Lagnel J, Tzima S, Alimzhanov MB, Rajewsky K, et al. 2006. FDC-speciﬁc functions
of p55TNFR and IKK2 in the development of FDC networks and of antibody responses. Immunity
24:65–77
86. Kopf M, Herren S, Wiles MV, Pepys MB, Kosco-Vilbois MH. 1998. Interleukin 6 inﬂuences germinal
center development and antibody production via a contribution of C3 complement component. J. Exp.
Med. 188:1895–906
87. Wu Y, El Shikh ME, El Sayed RM, Best AM, Szakal AK, Tew JG. 2009. IL-6 produced by immune
complex-activated follicular dendritic cells promotes germinal center reactions, IgG responses and
somatic hypermutation. Int. Immunol. 21:745–56
88. Nishikawa Y, Hikida M, Magari M, Kanayama N, Mori M, et al. 2006. Establishment of lymphotoxin
β receptor signaling-dependent cell lines with follicular dendritic cell phenotypes from mouse lymph
nodes. J. Immunol. 177:5204–14
89. Suzuki K, Maruya M, Kawamoto S, Sitnik K, Kitamura H, et al. 2010. The sensing of environmental
stimuli by follicular dendritic cells promotes immunoglobulin A generation in the gut. Immunity 33:71–
83
90. Haberman AM, Shlomchik MJ. 2003. Reassessing the function of immune-complex retention by fol-
licular dendritic cells. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3:757–64
91. Kosco-Vilbois MH. 2003. Are follicular dendritic cells really good for nothing? Nat. Rev. Immunol.
3:764–69
92. Boes M, Esau C, Fischer MB, Schmidt T, Carroll M, Chen J. 1998. Enhanced B-1 cell development,
but impaired IgG antibody responses in mice deﬁcient in secreted IgM. J. Immunol. 160:4776–87
93. Hannum LG, Haberman AM, Anderson SM, Shlomchik MJ. 2000. Germinal center initiation, variable
gene region hypermutation, and mutant B cell selection without detectable immune complexes on
follicular dendritic cells. J. Exp. Med. 192:931–42
94. Wu X, Jiang N, Fang YF, Xu C, Mao D, et al. 2000. Impaired afﬁnity maturation in Cr2-/- mice is
rescued by adjuvants without improvement in germinal center development. J. Immunol. 165:3119–27
95. Chen Z, Koralov SB, Gendelman M, Carroll MC, Kelsoe G. 2000. Humoral immune responses in
Cr2-/- mice: enhanced afﬁnity maturation but impaired antibody persistence. J. Immunol. 164:4522–32
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
451
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 24 ---
96. Matsumoto M, Lo SF, Carruthers CJ, Min J, Mariathasan S, et al. 1996. Afﬁnity maturation without
germinal centres in lymphotoxin-α-deﬁcient mice. Nature 382:462–66
97. Jacobson EB, Caporale LH, Thorbecke GJ. 1974. Effect of thymus cell injections on germinal center
formation in lymphoid tissues of nude (thymusless) mice. Cell Immunol. 13:416–30
98. Han S, Hathcock K, Zheng B, Kepler TB, Hodes R, Kelsoe G. 1995. Cellular interaction in germinal
centers. Roles of CD40 ligand and B7-2 in established germinal centers. J. Immunol. 155:556–67
99. Allen RC, Armitage RJ, Conley ME, Rosenblatt H, Jenkins NA, et al. 1993. CD40 ligand gene defects
responsible for X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome. Science 259:990–93
100. Ferrari S, Giliani S, Insalaco A, Al-Ghonaium A, Soresina AR, et al. 2001. Mutations of CD40 gene
cause an autosomal recessive form of immunodeﬁciency with hyper IgM. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
98:12614–19
101. Vinuesa CG, Tangye SG, Moser B, Mackay CR. 2005. Follicular B helper T cells in antibody responses
and autoimmunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5:853–65
102. Fazilleau N, Mark L, McHeyzer-Williams LJ, McHeyzer-Williams MG. 2009. Follicular helper T
cells: lineage and location. Immunity 30:324–35
103. Ansel KM, McHeyzer-Williams LJ, Ngo VN, McHeyzer-Williams MG, Cyster JG. 1999. In vivo-
activated CD4 T cells upregulate CXC chemokine receptor 5 and reprogram their response to lymphoid
chemokines. J. Exp. Med. 190:1123–34
104. Hutloff A, Dittrich AM, Beier KC, Eljaschewitsch B, Kraft R, et al. 1999. ICOS is an inducible T-cell
co-stimulator structurally and functionally related to CD28. Nature 397:263–66
105. Chtanova T, Tangye SG, Newton R, Frank N, Hodge MR, et al. 2004. T follicular helper cells express
a distinctive transcriptional proﬁle, reﬂecting their role as non-Th1/Th2 effector cells that provide help
for B cells. J. Immunol. 173:68–78
106. Kim CH, Rott LS, Clark-Lewis I, Campbell DJ, Wu L, Butcher EC. 2001. Subspecialization of
CXCR5+ T cells: B helper activity is focused in a germinal center-localized subset of CXCR5+ T
cells. J. Exp. Med. 193:1373–81
107. Yu D, Rao S, Tsai LM, Lee SK, He Y, et al. 2009. The transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 directs T follicular
helper cell lineage commitment. Immunity 31:457–68
108. Nurieva RI, Chung Y, Martinez GJ, Yang XO, Tanaka S, et al. 2009. Bcl6 mediates the development
of T follicular helper cells. Science 325:1001–5
109. Johnston RJ, Poholek AC, DiToro D, Yusuf I, Eto D, et al. 2009. Bcl6 and Blimp-1 are reciprocal and
antagonistic regulators of T follicular helper cell differentiation. Science 325:1006–10
110. Qi H, Cannons JL, Klauschen F, Schwartzberg PL, Germain RN. 2008. SAP-controlled T-B cell
interactions underlie germinal centre formation. Nature 455:764–69
111. Kitano M, Moriyama S, Ando Y, Hikida M, Mori Y, et al. 2011. Bcl6 protein expression shapes pre-
germinal center B cell dynamics and follicular helper T cell heterogeneity. Immunity 34:961–72
112. Vinuesa CG, Cook MC, Angelucci C, Athanasopoulos V, Rui L, et al. 2005. A RING-type ubiquitin
ligase family member required to repress follicular helper T cells and autoimmunity. Nature 435:452–58
113. Arnold CN, Campbell DJ, Lipp M, Butcher EC. 2007. The germinal center response is impaired in
the absence of T cell-expressed CXCR5. Eur. J. Immunol. 37:100–9
114. Kim HJ, Verbinnen B, Tang X, Lu L, Cantor H. 2010. Inhibition of follicular T-helper cells by CD8+
regulatory T cells is essential for self tolerance. Nature 467:328–32
115. Rolf J, Bell SE, Kovesdi D, Janas ML, Soond DR, et al. 2010. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity in T
cells regulates the magnitude of the germinal center reaction. J. Immunol. 185:4042–52
116. Kerdiles YM, Stone EL, Beisner DL, McGargill MA, Ch’en IL, et al. 2010. Foxo transcription factors
control regulatory T cell development and function. Immunity 33:890–904
117. Hsu HC, Yang P, Wang J, Wu Q, Myers R, et al. 2008. Interleukin 17-producing T helper cells and
interleukin 17 orchestrate autoreactive germinal center development in autoimmune BXD2 mice. Nat.
Immunol. 9:166–75
118. Alexander CM, Tygrett LT, Boyden AW, Wolniak KL, Legge KL, Waldschmidt TJ. 2011. T regulatory
cells participate in the control of germinal centre reactions. Immunology 133:452–68
119. Linterman MA, Pierson W, Lee SK, Kallies A, Kawamoto S, et al. 2011. Foxp3+ follicular regulatory
T cells control the germinal center response. Nat. Med. 17:975–82
452
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 25 ---
120. Chung Y, Tanaka S, Chu F, Nurieva RI, Martinez GJ, et al. 2011. Follicular regulatory T cells expressing
Foxp3 and Bcl-6 suppress germinal center reactions. Nat. Med. 17:983–88
120a. Wollenberg I, Agua-Doce A, Hern´andez A, Almeida C, Oliveira VG, et al. 2011. Regulation of the
germinal center reaction by Foxp3+ follicular regulatory T cells. J. Immunol. 187(9):4553–60
121. Baumann I, Kolowos W, Voll RE, Manger B, Gaipl U, et al. 2002. Impaired uptake of apoptotic cells
into tingible body macrophages in germinal centers of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
Arthritis Rheum. 46:191–201
122. Hanayama R, Tanaka M, Miyasaka K, Aozasa K, Koike M, et al. 2004. Autoimmune disease and impaired
uptake of apoptotic cells in MFG-E8-deﬁcient mice. Science 304:1147–50
123. Rahman ZS, Shao WH, Khan TN, Zhen Y, Cohen PL. 2010. Impaired apoptotic cell clearance in the
germinal center by Mer-deﬁcient tingible body macrophages leads to enhanced antibody-forming cell
and germinal center responses. J. Immunol. 185:5859–68
124. Ansel KM, Ngo VN, Hyman PL, Luther SA, Forster R, et al. 2000. A chemokine-driven positive
feedback loop organizes lymphoid follicles. Nature 406:309–14
125. Pereira JP, Kelly LM, Cyster JG. 2010. Finding the right niche: B-cell migration in the early phases of
T-dependent antibody responses. Int. Immunol. 22:413–19
126. Fooksman DR, Schwickert TA, Victora GD, Dustin ML, Nussenzweig MC, Skokos D. 2010. Devel-
opment and migration of plasma cells in the mouse lymph node. Immunity 33:118–27
127. Kepler TB, Perelson AS. 1993. Cyclic re-entry of germinal center B cells and the efﬁciency of afﬁnity
maturation. Immunol. Today 14:412–15
128. Oprea M, Perelson AS. 1997. Somatic mutation leads to efﬁcient afﬁnity maturation when centrocytes
recycle back to centroblasts. J. Immunol. 158:5155–62
129. Kocks C, Rajewsky K. 1988. Stepwise intraclonal maturation of antibody afﬁnity through somatic
hypermutation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:8206–10
130. Brown M, Stenzel-Poore M, Stevens S, Kondoleon SK, Ng J, et al. 1992. Immunologic memory to
phosphocholine keyhole limpet hemocyanin. Recurrent mutations in the lambda 1 light chain increase
afﬁnity for antigen. J. Immunol. 148:339–46
131. Hauser AE, Shlomchik MJ, Haberman AM. 2007. In vivo imaging studies shed light on germinal-centre
development. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7:499–504
132. Figge MT, Garin A, Gunzer M, Kosco-Vilbois M, Toellner KM, Meyer-Hermann M. 2008. Deriving
a germinal center lymphocyte migration model from two-photon data. J. Exp. Med. 205:3019–29
133. Beltman JB, Allen CD, Cyster JG, de Boer RJ. 2011. B cells within germinal centers migrate preferen-
tially from dark to light zone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108:8755–60
133a. Gatto D, Wood K, Brink R. 2011. EBI2 operates independently of but in cooperation with CXCR5
and CCR7 to direct B Cell migration and organization in follicles and the germinal center. J. Immunol.
187(9):4621–28
134. Voigt I, Camacho SA, de Boer BA, Lipp M, Forster R, Berek C. 2000. CXCR5-deﬁcient mice develop
functional germinal centers in the splenic T cell zone. Eur. J. Immunol. 30:560–67
135. Nie Y, Waite J, Brewer F, Sunshine MJ, Littman DR, Zou YR. 2004. The role of CXCR4 in maintaining
peripheral B cell compartments and humoral immunity. J. Exp. Med. 200:1145–56
136. Liu YJ, Joshua DE, Williams GT, Smith CA, Gordon J, MacLennan IC. 1989. Mechanism of antigen-
driven selection in germinal centres. Nature 342:929–31
137. Liu YJ, Mason DY, Johnson GD, Abbot S, Gregory CD, et al. 1991. Germinal center cells express bcl-2
protein after activation by signals which prevent their entry into apoptosis. Eur. J. Immunol. 21:1905–10
138. Vikstrom I, Carotta S, L¨uthje K, Peperzak V, Jost PJ, et al. 2010. Mcl-1 is essential for germinal center
formation and B cell memory. Science 330:1095–99
139. Shokat KM, Goodnow CC. 1995. Antigen-induced B-cell death and elimination during germinal-centre
immune responses. Nature 375:334–38
140. Pulendran B, Kannourakis G, Nouri S, Smith KG, Nossal GJ. 1995. Soluble antigen can cause enhanced
apoptosis of germinal-centre B cells. Nature 375:331–34
141. Han S, Zheng B, Dal Porto J, Kelsoe G. 1995. In situ studies of the primary immune response to
(4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl)acetyl. IV. Afﬁnity-dependent, antigen-driven B cell apoptosis in germinal
centers as a mechanism for maintaining self-tolerance. J. Exp. Med. 182:1635–44
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
453
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 26 ---
142. Diamond B, Katz JB, Paul E, Aranow C, Lustgarten D, Scharff MD. 1992. The role of somatic mutation
in the pathogenic anti-DNA response. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 10:731–57
143. Davidson A, Shefner R, Livneh A, Diamond B. 1987. The role of somatic mutation of immunoglobulin
genes in autoimmunity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 5:85–108
144. Rajewsky K. 1996. Clonal selection and learning in the antibody system. Nature 381:751–58
145. Shih TA, Meffre E, Roederer M, Nussenzweig MC. 2002. Role of BCR afﬁnity in T cell dependent
antibody responses in vivo. Nat. Immunol. 3:570–75
146. Dal Porto JM, Haberman AM, Kelsoe G, Shlomchik MJ. 2002. Very low afﬁnity B cells form germinal
centers, become memory B cells, and participate in secondary immune responses when higher afﬁnity
competition is reduced. J. Exp. Med. 195:1215–21
147. Schwickert TA, Victora GD, Fooksman DR, Kamphorst AO, Mugnier MR, et al. 2011. A dynamic T
cell-limited checkpoint regulates afﬁnity-dependent B cell entry into the germinal center. J. Exp. Med.
208:1243–52
148. Raff MC. 1992. Social controls on cell survival and cell death. Nature 356:397–400
149. Tarlinton DM, Smith KG. 2000. Dissecting afﬁnity maturation: a model explaining selection of
antibody-forming cells and memory B cells in the germinal centre. Immunol. Today 21:436–41
150. Ravetch JV, Bolland S. 2001. IgG Fc receptors. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 19:275–90
151. Manser T. 2004. Textbook germinal centers? J. Immunol. 172:3369–75
152. Batista FD, Iber D, Neuberger MS. 2001. B cells acquire antigen from target cells after synapse forma-
tion. Nature 411:489–94
153. Batista FD, Arana E, Barral P, Carrasco YR, Depoil D, et al. 2007. The role of integrins and coreceptors
in reﬁning thresholds for B-cell responses. Immunol. Rev. 218:197–213
154. Tarlinton DM. 2008. Evolution in miniature: selection, survival and distribution of antigen reactive
cells in the germinal centre. Immunol. Cell Biol. 86:133–38
155. Meyer-Hermann ME, Maini PK, Iber D. 2006. An analysis of B cell selection mechanisms in germinal
centers. Math. Med. Biol. 23:255–77
156. Goidl EA, Paul WE, Siskind GW, Benacerraf B. 1968. The effect of antigen dose and time after
immunization on the amount and afﬁnity of anti-hapten antibody. J. Immunol. 100:371–75
157. Nussenzweig V, Benacerraf B. 1967. Antihapten antibody speciﬁcity and L chain type. J. Exp. Med.
126:727–43
158. Lam KP, Kuhn R, Rajewsky K. 1997. In vivo ablation of surface immunoglobulin on mature B cells by
inducible gene targeting results in rapid cell death. Cell 90:1073–83
159. Rickert RC, Rajewsky K, Roes J. 1995. Impairment of T-cell-dependent B-cell responses and B-1 cell
development in CD19-deﬁcient mice. Nature 376:352–55
160. Randall KL, Lambe T, Johnson A, Treanor B, Kucharska E, et al. 2009. Dock8 mutations cripple
B cell immunological synapses, germinal centers and long-lived antibody production. Nat. Immunol.
10:1283–91
161. Ahearn JM, Fischer MB, Croix D, Goerg S, Ma M, et al. 1996. Disruption of the Cr2 locus results in a
reduction in B-1a cells and in an impaired B cell response to T-dependent antigen. Immunity 4:251–62
162. Croix DA, Ahearn JM, Rosengard AM, Han S, Kelsoe G, et al. 1996. Antibody response to a T-
dependent antigen requires B cell expression of complement receptors. J. Exp. Med. 183:1857–64
163. Kraus M, Pao LI, Reichlin A, Hu Y, Canono B, et al. 2001. Interference with immunoglobulin (Ig)α
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) phosphorylation modulates or blocks B cell
development, depending on the availability of an Igβ cytoplasmic tail. J. Exp. Med. 194:455–69
164. Okkenhaug K, Bilancio A, Farjot G, Priddle H, Sancho S, et al. 2002. Impaired B and T cell antigen
receptor signaling in p110δ PI 3-kinase mutant mice. Science 297:1031–34
165. Jou ST, Carpino N, Takahashi Y, Piekorz R, Chao JR, et al. 2002. Essential, nonredundant role for the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110δin signaling by the B-cell receptor complex. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22:8580–91
166. Sato S, Ono N, Steeber DA, Pisetsky DS, Tedder TF. 1996. CD19 regulates B lymphocyte signaling
thresholds critical for the development of B-1 lineage cells and autoimmunity. J. Immunol. 157:4371–78
167. Carter RH, Myers R. 2008. Germinal center structure and function: lessons from CD19. Semin. Im-
munol. 20:43–48
454
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 27 ---
168. Fehr T, Rickert RC, Odermatt B, Roes J, Rajewsky K, et al. 1998. Antiviral protection and germinal
center formation, but impaired B cell memory in the absence of CD19. J. Exp. Med. 188:145–55
169. Takai T, Ono M, Hikida M, Ohmori H, Ravetch JV. 1996. Augmented humoral and anaphylactic
responses in FcγRII-deﬁcient mice. Nature 379:346–49
170. Huntington ND, Xu Y, Puthalakath H, Light A, Willis SN, et al. 2006. CD45 links the B cell receptor
with cell survival and is required for the persistence of germinal centers. Nat. Immunol. 7:190–98
171. Janeway CA Jr. 1999. The discovery of T cell help for B cell antibody formation: a perspective from
the 30th anniversary of this discovery. Immunol. Cell Biol. 77:177–79
172. Zotos D, Coquet JM, Zhang Y, Light A, D’Costa K, et al. 2010. IL-21 regulates germinal center B cell
differentiation and proliferation through a B cell-intrinsic mechanism. J. Exp. Med. 207:365–78
173. Linterman MA, Beaton L, Yu D, Ramiscal RR, Srivastava M, et al. 2010. IL-21 acts directly on B cells
to regulate Bcl-6 expression and germinal center responses. J. Exp. Med. 207:353–63
174. Depoil D, Zaru R, Guiraud M, Chauveau A, Harriague J, et al. 2005. Immunological synapses are
versatile structures enabling selective T cell polarization. Immunity 22:185–94
175. Reinhardt RL, Liang HE, Locksley RM. 2009. Cytokine-secreting follicular T cells shape the antibody
repertoire. Nat. Immunol. 10:385–93
176. Draghi NA, Denzin LK. 2010. H2-O, a MHC class II-like protein, sets a threshold for B-cell entry
into germinal centers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:16607–12
177. Engel P, Zhou LJ, Ord DC, Sato S, Koller B, Tedder TF. 1995. Abnormal B lymphocyte development,
activation, and differentiation in mice that lack or overexpress the CD19 signal transduction molecule.
Immunity 3:39–50
178. Anzelon AN, Wu H, Rickert RC. 2003. Pten inactivation alters peripheral B lymphocyte fate and
reconstitutes CD19 function. Nat. Immunol. 4:287–94
179. Kosco-Vilbois MH, Gray D, Scheidegger D, Julius M. 1993. Follicular dendritic cells help resting
B cells to become effective antigen-presenting cells: induction of B7/BB1 and upregulation of major
histocompatibility complex class II molecules. J. Exp. Med. 178:2055–66
180. Kozono Y, Abe R, Kozono H, Kelly RG, Azuma T, Holers VM. 1998. Cross-linking CD21/CD35 or
CD19 increases both B7-1 and B7-2 expression on murine splenic B cells. J. Immunol. 160:1565–72
181. Damdinsuren B, Zhang Y, Khalil A, Wood WH 3rd, Becker KG, et al. 2010. Single round of antigen
receptor signaling programs naive B cells to receive T cell help. Immunity 32:355–66
182. Kuppers R, Zhao M, Hansmann ML, Rajewsky K. 1993. Tracing B cell development in human germinal
centres by molecular analysis of single cells picked from histological sections. EMBO J. 12:4955–67
183. Bende RJ, van Maldegem F, Triesscheijn M, Wormhoudt TA, Guijt R, van Noesel CJ. 2007. Germinal
centers in human lymph nodes contain reactivated memory B cells. J. Exp. Med. 204:2655–65
184. Shapiro-Shelef M, Calame K. 2005. Regulation of plasma-cell development. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5:230–
42
185. Gray D. 1993. Immunological memory. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 11:49–77
186. Dogan I, Bertocci B, Vilmont V, Delbos F, Megret J, et al. 2009. Multiple layers of B cell memory with
different effector functions. Nat. Immunol. 10:1292–99
187. Pape KA, Taylor JJ, Maul RW, Gearhart PJ, Jenkins MK. 2011. Different B cell populations mediate
early and late memory during an endogenous immune response. Science 331:1203–7
188. Angelin-Duclos C, Cattoretti G, Lin KI, Calame K. 2000. Commitment of B lymphocytes to a plasma
cell fate is associated with Blimp-1 expression in vivo. J. Immunol. 165:5462–71
189. Martins G, Calame K. 2008. Regulation and functions of Blimp-1 in T and B lymphocytes. Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 26:133–69
190. Smith KG, Light A, Nossal GJ, Tarlinton DM. 1997. The extent of afﬁnity maturation differs between
the memory and antibody-forming cell compartments in the primary immune response. EMBO J.
16:2996–3006
191. Smith KG, Light A, O’Reilly LA, Ang SM, Strasser A, Tarlinton D. 2000. bcl-2 transgene expression
inhibits apoptosis in the germinal center and reveals differences in the selection of memory B cells and
bone marrow antibody-forming cells. J. Exp. Med. 191:475–84
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
455
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 28 ---
192. Paus D, Phan TG, Chan TD, Gardam S, Basten A, Brink R. 2006. Antigen recognition strength
regulates the choice between extrafollicular plasma cell and germinal center B cell differentiation. J.
Exp. Med. 203:1081–91
193. Phan TG, Paus D, Chan TD, Turner ML, Nutt SL, et al. 2006. High afﬁnity germinal center B cells
are actively selected into the plasma cell compartment. J. Exp. Med. 203:2419–24
194. Brink R, Phan TG, Paus D, Chan TD. 2007. Visualizing the effects of antigen afﬁnity on T-dependent
B-cell differentiation. Immunol. Cell Biol. 86:31–39
195. de Vinuesa CG, Cook MC, Ball J, Drew M, Sunners Y, et al. 2000. Germinal centers without T cells.
J. Exp. Med. 191:485–94
196. Shih TA, Roederer M, Nussenzweig MC. 2002. Role of antigen receptor afﬁnity in T cell-independent
antibody responses in vivo. Nat. Immunol. 3:399–406
197. Good-Jacobson KL, Shlomchik MJ. 2010. Plasticity and heterogeneity in the generation of memory B
cells and long-lived plasma cells: the inﬂuence of germinal center interactions and dynamics. J. Immunol.
185:3117–25
198. Sciammas R, Shaffer AL, Schatz JH, Zhao H, Staudt LM, Singh H. 2006. Graded expression of in-
terferon regulatory factor-4 coordinates isotype switching with plasma cell differentiation. Immunity
25:225–36
199. Klein U, Casola S, Cattoretti G, Shen Q, Lia M, et al. 2006. Transcription factor IRF4 controls plasma
cell differentiation and class-switch recombination. Nat. Immunol. 7:773–82
200. Saito M, Gao J, Basso K, Kitagawa Y, Smith PM, et al. 2007. A signaling pathway mediating down-
regulation of BCL6 in germinal center B cells is blocked by BCL6 gene alterations in B cell lymphoma.
Cancer Cell 12:280–92
201. Uchida J, Yasui T, Takaoka-Shichijo Y, Muraoka M, Kulwichit W, et al. 1999. Mimicry of CD40 signals
by Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 in B lymphocyte responses. Science 286:300–3
202. Erickson LD, Durell BG, Vogel LA, O’Connor BP, Cascalho M, et al. 2002. Short-circuiting long-lived
humoral immunity by the heightened engagement of CD40. J. Clin. Investig. 109:613–20
203. Homig-Holzel C, Hojer C, Rastelli J, Casola S, Strobl LJ, et al. 2008. Constitutive CD40 signaling in
B cells selectively activates the noncanonical NF-κB pathway and promotes lymphomagenesis. J. Exp.
Med. 205:1317–29
204. Bolduc A, Long E, Stapler D, Cascalho M, Tsubata T, et al. 2010. Constitutive CD40L expression on B
cells prematurely terminates germinal center response and leads to augmented plasma cell production
in T cell areas. J. Immunol. 185:220–30
205. Kishi Y, Aiba Y, Higuchi T, Furukawa K, Tokuhisa T, et al. 2010. Augmented antibody response with
premature germinal center regression in CD40L transgenic mice. J. Immunol. 185:211–19
206. Nutt SL, Tarlinton DM. 2011. Germinal center B and follicular helper T cells: siblings, cousins or just
good friends? Nat. Immunol. 12:472–77
207. Heiser RA, Snyder CM, St Clair J, Wysocki LJ. 2011. Aborted germinal center reactions and B cell
memory by follicular T cells speciﬁc for a B cell receptor V region peptide. J. Immunol. 187:212–21
208. Good-Jacobson KL, Szumilas CG, Chen L, Sharpe AH, Tomayko MM, Shlomchik MJ. 2010. PD-1
regulates germinal center B cell survival and the formation and afﬁnity of long-lived plasma cells. Nat.
Immunol. 11:535–42
209. Tangye SG, Tarlinton DM. 2009. Memory B cells: effectors of long-lived immune responses. Eur. J.
Immunol. 39:2065–75
210. Toyama H, Okada S, Hatano M, Takahashi Y, Takeda N, et al. 2002. Memory B cells without somatic
hypermutation are generated from Bcl6-deﬁcient B cells. Immunity 17:329–39
211. Blink EJ, Light A, Kallies A, Nutt SL, Hodgkin PD, Tarlinton DM. 2005. Early appearance of germinal
center-derived memory B cells and plasma cells in blood after primary immunization. J. Exp. Med.
201:545–54
212. Obukhanych TV, Nussenzweig MC. 2006. T-independent type II immune responses generate memory
B cells. J. Exp. Med. 203:305–10
213. Smith KG, Weiss U, Rajewsky K, Nossal GJ, Tarlinton DM. 1994. Bcl-2 increases memory B cell
recruitment but does not perturb selection in germinal centers. Immunity 1:803–13
456
Victora· Nussenzweig
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 29 ---
214. Takahashi Y, Ohta H, Takemori T. 2001. Fas is required for clonal selection in germinal centers and
the subsequent establishment of the memory B cell repertoire. Immunity 14:181–92
215. van Es JH, Gmelig Meyling FH, van de Akker WR, Aanstoot H, Derksen RH, Logtenberg T. 1991.
Somatic mutations in the variable regions of a human IgG anti-double-stranded DNA autoantibody
suggest a role for antigen in the induction of systemic lupus erythematosus. J. Exp. Med. 173:461–70
216. Mietzner B, Tsuiji M, Scheid J, Velinzon K, Tiller T, et al. 2008. Autoreactive IgG memory antibodies
in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus arise from nonreactive and polyreactive precursors. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105:9727–32
217. Shlomchik MJ, Marshak-Rothstein A, Wolfowicz CB, Rothstein TL, Weigert MG. 1987. The role of
clonal selection and somatic mutation in autoimmunity. Nature 328:805–11
218. Wardemann H, Yurasov S, Schaefer A, Young JW, Meffre E, Nussenzweig MC. 2003. Predominant
autoantibody production by early human B cell precursors. Science 301:1374–77
219. Tiller T, Tsuiji M, Yurasov S, Velinzon K, Nussenzweig MC, Wardemann H. 2007. Autoreactivity in
human IgG+ memory B cells. Immunity 26:205–13
220. Mouquet H, Scheid JF, Zoller MJ, Krogsgaard M, Ott RG, et al. 2010. Polyreactivity increases the
apparent afﬁnity of anti-HIV antibodies by heteroligation. Nature 467:591–95
221. Notidis E, Heltemes L, Manser T. 2002. Dominant, hierarchical induction of peripheral tolerance
during foreign antigen-driven B cell development. Immunity 17:317–27
222. Hibbs ML, Tarlinton DM, Armes J, Grail D, Hodgson G, et al. 1995. Multiple defects in the immune
system of Lyn-deﬁcient mice, culminating in autoimmune disease. Cell 83:301–11
223. O’Keefe TL, Williams GT, Batista FD, Neuberger MS. 1999. Deﬁciency in CD22, a B cell-speciﬁc
inhibitory receptor, is sufﬁcient to predispose to development of high afﬁnity autoantibodies. J. Exp.
Med. 189:1307–13
224. Bolland S, Ravetch JV. 2000. Spontaneous autoimmune disease in FcγRIIB-deﬁcient mice results from
strain-speciﬁc epistasis. Immunity 13:277–85
225. Nishimura H, Okazaki T, Tanaka Y, Nakatani K, Hara M, et al. 2001. Autoimmune dilated cardiomy-
opathy in PD-1 receptor-deﬁcient mice. Science 291:319–22
226. Tiller T, Kofer J, Kreschel C, Busse CE, Riebel S, et al. 2010. Development of self-reactive germinal
center B cells and plasma cells in autoimmune FcγRIIB-deﬁcient mice. J. Exp. Med. 207:2767–78
227. McGaha TL, Sorrentino B, Ravetch JV. 2005. Restoration of tolerance in lupus by targeted inhibitory
receptor expression. Science 307:590–93
228. Cohen PL, Eisenberg RA. 1991. Lpr and gld: single gene models of systemic autoimmunity and lym-
phoproliferative disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 9:243–69
229. Fisher GH, Rosenberg FJ, Straus SE, Dale JK, Middleton LA, et al. 1995. Dominant interfering Fas
gene mutations impair apoptosis in a human autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Cell 81:935–46
230. Rieux-Laucat F, Le Deist F, Hivroz C, Roberts IA, Debatin KM, et al. 1995. Mutations in Fas associated
with human lymphoproliferative syndrome and autoimmunity. Science 268:1347–49
231. Hao Z, Duncan GS, Seagal J, Su YW, Hong C, et al. 2008. Fas receptor expression in germinal-center
B cells is essential for T and B lymphocyte homeostasis. Immunity 29:615–27
232. Mabrouk I, Buart S, Hasmim M, Michiels C, Connault E, et al. 2008. Prevention of autoimmunity
and control of recall response to exogenous antigen by Fas death receptor ligand expression on T cells.
Immunity 29:922–33
233. Kroese FG, Wubbena AS, Seijen HG, Nieuwenhuis P. 1987. Germinal centers develop oligoclonally.
Eur. J. Immunol. 17:1069–72
234. Scheid JF, Mouquet H, Feldhahn N, Seaman MS, Velinzon K, et al. 2009. Broad diversity of neutralizing
antibodies isolated from memory B cells in HIV-infected individuals. Nature 458:636–40
www.annualreviews.org • Germinal Centers
457
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 30 ---
Annual Review of
Immunology
Volume 30, 2012
Contents
Decisions About Dendritic Cells: Past, Present, and Future
Ralph M. Steinman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 1
The Basel Institute for Immunology
Fritz Melchers
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p23
Regulation of Immune Responses by mTOR
Jonathan D. Powell, Kristen N. Pollizzi, Emily B. Heikamp,
and Maureen R. Horton
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p39
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate and Lymphocyte Egress from Lymphoid Organs
Jason G. Cyster and Susan R. Schwab p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p69
Selection of Self-Reactive T Cells in the Thymus
Gretta L. Stritesky, Stephen C. Jameson, and Kristin A. Hogquist
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p95
Adaptive Immunity to Fungi
Marcel W¨uthrich, George S. Deepe, Jr., and Bruce Klein
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 115
Microbial Translocation Across the GI Tract
Jason M. Brenchley and Daniel C. Douek p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 149
The Response to and Repair of RAG-Mediated DNA Double-Strand Breaks
Beth A. Helmink and Barry P. Sleckman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 175
VLR-Based Adaptive Immunity
Thomas Boehm, Nathanael McCurley, Yoichi Sutoh, Michael Schorpp,
Masanori Kasahara, and Max D. Cooper p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 203
Immune Regulatory Function of B Cells
Claudia Mauri and Anneleen Bosma p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 221
Lung Dendritic Cells in Respiratory Viral Infection and Asthma: From
Protection to Immunopathology
Bart N. Lambrecht and Hamida Hammad p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 243
Tolerance of Infections
Janelle S. Ayres and David S. Schneider p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 271
microRNA Regulation of Inﬂammatory Responses
Ryan M. O’Connell, Dinesh S. Rao, and David Baltimore
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 295
ix
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.


--- Page 31 ---
Reﬂex Principles of Immunological Homeostasis
Ulf Andersson and Kevin J. Tracey p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 313
Chromatin Topology and the Regulation of Antigen Receptor Assembly
Claudia Bossen, Robert Mansson, and Cornelis Murre p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 337
Siglecs and Immune Regulation
Shiv Pillai, Ilka Arun Netravali, Annaiah Cariappa, and Hamid Mattoo p p p p p p p p p p p p p 357
Monogenic Autoimmunity
Mickie H. Cheng and Mark S. Anderson p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 393
Germinal Centers
Gabriel D. Victora and Michel C. Nussenzweig p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 429
Neutrophil Function: From Mechanisms to Disease
Borko Amulic, Christel Cazalet, Garret L. Hayes, Kathleen D. Metzler,
and Arturo Zychlinsky
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 459
Signaling by Myeloid C-Type Lectin Receptors in Immunity and
Homeostasis
David Sancho and Caetano Reis e Sousa
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 491
Regulatory T Cells: Mechanisms of Differentiation and Function
Steven Z. Josefowicz, Li-Fan Lu, and Alexander Y. Rudensky p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 531
Pathogenesis of Human B Cell Lymphomas
Arthur L. Shaffer III, Ryan M. Young, and Louis M. Staudt p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 565
Autophagy and the Immune System
Petric Kuballa, Whitney M. Nolte, Adam B. Castoreno, and Ramnik J. Xavier p p p p p p p 611
Innate Lymphoid Cells: Emerging Insights in Development, Lineage
Relationships, and Function
Hergen Spits and Tom Cupedo p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 647
Cancer and Inﬂammation: An Old Intuition with Rapidly Evolving New
Concepts
Giorgio Trinchieri p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 677
Transcriptional and Epigenetic Control of T Helper Cell Speciﬁcation:
Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Commitment and Plasticity
Yuka Kanno, Golnaz Vahedi, Kiyoshi Hirahara, Kentner Singleton,
and John J. O’Shea p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 707
Induced CD4+Foxp3+ Regulatory T Cells in Immune Tolerance
Angelina M. Bilate and Juan J. Lafaille p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 733
The Microbiome in Infectious Disease and Inﬂammation
Kenya Honda and Dan R. Littman p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 759
x
Contents
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:429-457. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Pennsylvania State University on 05/22/12. For personal use only.
