--- Page 1 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
361
nature reviews microbiology
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-023-00878-2
Review article
 Check for updates
The evolution of SARS-CoV-2
Peter V. Markov 
  1,2 
, Mahan Ghafari3, Martin Beer 
  4, Katrina Lythgoe3, Peter Simmonds5, Nikolaos I. Stilianakis 
  1,6  
& Aris Katzourakis 
  7 
Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
has caused millions of deaths and substantial morbidity worldwide. 
Intense scientific effort to understand the biology of SARS-CoV-2 has 
resulted in daunting numbers of genomic sequences. We witnessed 
evolutionary events that could mostly be inferred indirectly before, 
such as the emergence of variants with distinct phenotypes, for 
example transmissibility, severity and immune evasion. This Review 
explores the mechanisms that generate genetic variation in SARS-
CoV-2, underlying the within-host and population-level processes 
that underpin these events. We examine the selective forces that 
likely drove the evolution of higher transmissibility and, in some cases, 
higher severity during the first year of the pandemic and the role of 
antigenic evolution during the second and third years, together with 
the implications of immune escape and reinfections, and the increasing 
evidence for and potential relevance of recombination. In order to 
understand how major lineages, such as variants of concern (VOCs), 
are generated, we contrast the evidence for the chronic infection model 
underlying the emergence of VOCs with the possibility of an animal 
reservoir playing a role in SARS-CoV-2 evolution, and conclude that the 
former is more likely. We evaluate uncertainties and outline scenarios 
for the possible future evolutionary trajectories of SARS-CoV-2.
Sections
Introduction
The generation of diversity 
during the SARS-CoV-2 
pandemic
Levels of evolution in 
SARS-CoV-2
Evolutionary phases of the 
pandemic
Transmissibility: the primary 
driver of SARS-CoV-2 
evolution
The evolution of virulence
Evolutionary origins of 
variants of concern
Possible future scenarios
1European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, Italy. 2London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 
University of London, London, UK. 3Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 4Institute of Diagnostic 
Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Insel Riems, Germany. 5Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK. 6Department of Biometry and Epidemiology, University of Erlangen–Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. 
7Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
 e-mail: peter.markov@lshtm.ac.uk; aris.katzourakis@
biology.ox.ac.uk


--- Page 2 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
362
Review article
virus (HIV; ~10–4  × 10–6 mutations per nucleotide per replication cycle), 
which, unlike coronaviruses, lack a 3′ exonuclease proofreading mecha-
nism in their replication machinery8,10–12. Insertions and deletions result 
from replication errors and can also generate diversity, such as the dele-
tion at position 69–70 of the spike gene responsible for the S-gene drop-
out that was instrumental in detecting the SARS-CoV-2 Alpha variant, 
and has been reported to be associated with increased infectivity13.
In addition to RNA replication errors, host-mediated genome 
editing by innate cell defence mechanisms may introduce substantial 
numbers of directed mutations into the SARS-CoV-2 genome, and 
thus may influence its evolutionary rate. Cellular mutational driv-
ers include members of the apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, 
catalytic polypeptide-like (APOBEC) family14–16, including APOBEC1, 
APOBEC3A and APOBEC3G that demonstrate editing activity for 
numerous DNA and RNA virus and retroviral genomes17,18, including 
SARS-CoV-2 (ref. 19). APOBEC activity has been inferred bioinformati-
cally through observations of a substantial excess of C → U transitions 
over all other mutations18,20,21. SARS-CoV-2 genomes may also be edited 
by different cellular antiviral proteins (adenosine deaminases that act 
on RNA 1 (ADAR1)), leading to A → G mutations (and U → C mutations in 
opposite genomic strands)21,22.
The potential editing-associated C → U mutations in the SARS-
CoV-2 genome sequences introduce complexities to SARS-CoV-2 
evolutionary genomic analysis. C → U mutations account, in part, for 
the strikingly high ratio of non-synonymous changes in SARS-CoV-2 
genomes compared with those at synonymous sites; the mean dN/dS 
ratio is ~0.7–0.8, which is a measure of the ratio of non-synonymous 
mutations per non-synonymous site (dN) to synonymous mutations 
per synonymous site (dS)20. Such mutations may be a potent driver of 
antigenic or phenotypic changes. Furthermore, C → U mutations may 
be skewed towards mutational ‘hot spots’ generated by RNA struc-
tures and specific base contexts. Repeated cycles of C → U transitions 
and selective reversions may create a large number of homoplasic 
sites20,23,24 and, therefore, convergence in otherwise genetically 
divergent strains.
Substitution rate
Although often confused, the substitution rate (also known as the rate 
of molecular evolution) is distinct from the mutation rate25. The sub-
stitution rate measures the pace of mutation accumulation as the virus 
evolves. A high rate means the virus accrues many mutations per unit 
of time. For RNA viruses, the substitution rate is commonly estimated 
using phylogenetic methods. In essence, these employ statistical phylo­
genetics, combining information on time spans and differences in the 
number of mutations in virus sequences sampled at different time 
points to estimate a substitution rate26,27. Importantly, only mutations 
that reach detectable frequencies in the population contribute to esti-
mations of the evolutionary rate (Fig. 1). An important obstacle to meas-
uring the SARS-CoV-2 substitution rate during the early stages of the 
pandemic was the limited amount of accrued evolutionary changes, 
insufficient to make robust estimations28. Before the emergence of 
variants of concern (VOCs), the virus was estimated to acquire nearly 
two evolutionary changes a month (~2 × 10–6 per site per day)28,29 (Fig. 1a).
Recombination
Recombination is another mechanism that can expedite adaptation in 
viruses by bringing together mutations from different genetic back-
grounds to create hybrid variants. Recombination is a common feature 
of betacoronavirus evolution and has been detected in SARS-CoV-2 
Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a betacoronavirus, which is closely related 
to the human SARS-CoV virus — the cause of the 2002–2004 SARS 
outbreak. Three years since the start of the first coronavirus pandemic in 
living memory, attention understandably turns to what a future with the 
SARS-CoV-2 virus might look like. The pandemic also saw the generation 
of unparalleled amounts of genomic data for a single pathogen1, serving 
to combat but also understand the biology of this virus. We witnessed 
evolutionary events that have previously been largely the preserve of 
indirect inference, including the diversification of SARS-CoV-2 into vari-
ants with distinct phenotypic characteristics including transmissibility, 
severity and immune evasion. Tracking the evolution of this pathogen 
in real time offers hope of understanding the processes generating this 
diversity, potentially predicting possible future evolutionary trajecto-
ries of the virus, and offering avenues for prevention and treatment. 
To facilitate such possibilities there is a pressing need to critically review 
the key drivers of SARS-CoV-2 evolution, and to explain the processes 
that generate diversity and novelty in the virus.
Like most RNA viruses, coronaviruses evolve rapidly, their evolu-
tion occurring on timescales of months or years and often observable 
and measurable. Evolution occurs on comparable timescales with the 
virus’ transmission events and ecological dynamics (such as changes 
in the number of infectious individuals over time, immunity profiles 
and human mobility). As a consequence, evolutionary, ecological and 
epidemiological processes impact each other, a feature of RNA viruses2. 
Evolution in viruses is driven by the rate at which mutations are gener-
ated and spread through populations. Natural selection will act to fix 
advantageous mutations, such as, for example, the D614G mutation, 
which confers elevated transmissibility3. Viral evolution involves an 
additional level of complexity, as viruses replicate and evolve within 
individuals, but they must also successfully transmit person to person, 
resulting in evolution at a different scale. Most variation is lost during 
the tight bottlenecks imposed at transmission, whereas some muta-
tions are often passed on by chance, without selective advantage4. 
In addition to these population-level processes, as viral lineages diver-
sify, including into potentially antigenically distinct strains, higher-level 
processes such as lineage competition and extinction emerge.
In this Review, we consider the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 at differ-
ent scales, the phases of the COVID-19 pandemic, factors that drive the 
evolution of the virus, theories for the emergence of epidemiologically 
important variants and potential future evolutionary scenarios and 
their likely public health repercussions.
The generation of diversity during the SARS-CoV-2 
pandemic
Mutation rate: replication fidelity and host-mediated genome 
editing
A key determinant of the rate at which a virus evolves is its mutation rate. 
This is the intrinsic rate at which genetic changes emerge per replication 
cycle, a biochemical property determined by the replication fidelity of a 
virus’ polymerase enzyme. These genetic changes are the ‘raw material’ 
on which selection acts. Most mutations are deleterious, and virions 
hosting them fail to replicate5–7. SARS-CoV-2 mutation rate estimates of 
around 1 × 10–6–2 × 10–6 mutations per nucleotide per replication cycle 
are consistent with previous estimates in other betacoronaviruses5,8,9. 
These mutation rates lie below the range of rates that are typical for 
other RNA viruses such as hepatitis C virus (HCV; ~10–5 × 10–6 mutations 
per nucleotide per replication cycle) and human immunodeficiency 


--- Page 3 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
363
Review article
(ref. 30) and other sarbecoviruses30–32. In order for recombination to 
occur and be subsequently detected, a host must be co-infected with 
two genetically distinct viruses that, when recombined, produce viable 
progeny that can spread to other hosts. Our ability to detect recom-
binants therefore increases over time since emergence, along with 
a growing genetic divergence of SARS-CoV-2, which allows multiple 
divergent lineages to co-circulate within the same region (Fig. 2d).
One of the first reported cases of inter-lineage SARS-CoV-2 recom-
binants was the XA lineage, first detected in the United Kingdom33,34. 
Tentative evidence of recombination between VOCs (Alpha and Delta) 
has also been reported in a small cluster of cases in Japan35. A later study 
showed widespread circulation of a recombinant B.1.631/B.1.634 line-
age (designated as lineage XB by the Pango nomenclature) in North 
America. Later studies found three recombinant lineages, which were 
given Pango designation. Two are a combination of Delta and BA.1 
(XD and XF) and one is a BA.1/BA.2 recombinant (XE)36. More recently, 
several other Omicron recombinants have been identified37.
Levels of evolution in SARS-CoV-2
Evolution within individuals during acute infections
The majority of infections with SARS-CoV-2 are acute and cleared by 
the immune system typically within 10–15 days after the onset of symp-
toms38–40 (Fig. 2a). Once SARS-CoV-2 infects an individual, viral particles 
are produced exponentially in the respiratory tract, reaching peak 
titres around 2–5 days post infection, which approximately coincides 
with the time of symptom onset41,42, with similar dynamics across most 
variants of SARS-CoV-2 (ref. 43), except for Omicron that peaks around 
3 days after the onset of symptoms44.
Within-host diversity of viruses is usually quantified by the number 
of intra-host single-nucleotide variants (iSNVs) that are detected above 
a certain minor allele frequency threshold (usually >2–5%). During a 
typical acute infection, SARS-CoV-2 intra-host diversity is limited, 
with most samples containing very few iSNVs at low frequency45. There 
is also likely tissue organ compartmentalization of the virus, as dem-
onstrated by discordance between the viral populations in nasal and 
oral environments46,47.
Transmission bottleneck
The transmission bottleneck is the amount of genetic diversity in the 
founder virus population that gets transmitted to a new host, compared 
with that in the donor host in a transmission event. The transmission 
bottleneck is therefore the link between within-host evolutionary pro-
cesses and the between-host level of evolution. Following transmis-
sion, SARS-CoV-2 infection is typically established by one or two virions, 
meaning most variants generated during the course of the previous 
infection are lost, or occasionally fixed in the new host if they happen 
Genetic distance from the root
Genetic distance from the root
Clock rate (×10–3 substitutions
per site per year)
Clock rate (×10–3 substitutions
per site per year)
TMRCA
Sample date
Sample date
Terminal branch
Mean
Internal branch
0.5
1.0
VOC
Stem
Background
0.7
3.5
Terminal branch
Internal branch
Background
Genetic distance
Genetic distance
Stem branch
Variant of concern
a
b
Fig. 1 | Reconstructing the evolutionary history of SARS-CoV-2 and its rate 
of evolution over time using viral sequence data. a, As the virus spreads and 
acquires further evolutionary changes, sequence data from different time points 
can be used to infer viral evolutionary rates as well as the time to the most recent 
common ancestor (TMRCA) of sampled viruses. The rate of evolution is elevated 
at terminal branches (shown in red) relative to internal branches (shown in blue). 
This is because the former includes more deleterious mutations that only persist 
in the population for a limited period of time before they are removed by purifying 
selection. b, If the genomic samples include both variant of concern (VOC) 
and non-VOC (background) sequences, the evolutionary rate at the stem branch 
(shown in red) connecting the clade of the VOC sequences to the rest of the tree is 
elevated in comparison with the rate on all other branches in the entire phylogeny. 
This is because of the large number of evolutionary changes present in all VOC 
samples relative to the background.


--- Page 4 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
364
Review article
to be transmitted. This implies that iSNVs are rarely shared between 
individuals45,48 (Fig. 2b). The considerable role of stochasticity in the 
transmission of iSNVs through the transmission bottleneck impedes 
robust estimations of the magnitude of the selective advantage of 
mutants, except when selection is very strong49,50. D614G, and to a greater 
extent the emergence of VOCs, all featured striking selective advan-
tages. A narrow transmission bottleneck is a universal feature of viral 
transmission51, observed in human52–55 and non-human viruses alike51,56.
Evolution at the host population level
When considering evolution at the between-host scale, within-host 
viral diversity is typically ignored and, instead, focus is given to the 
consensus sequence, which is essentially the sequence obtained by 
taking the most common iSNV at each site along the genome. Before 
the emergence of VOCs, and now within the major VOC lineages, the 
limited genetic diversity of the virus present in individuals who are 
acutely infected and the narrow transmission bottleneck mean that 
Log10 (viral load)
tc
tg
Below 
detection 
level
Days following infection
Viral diversity on
transmission day
Initial infection by a 
homogeneous virus population
Intra-host evolution during an acute infection
a
Transmission chains within a region
c
d
A single transmission event following 
intra-host evolution in the donor
b
More likely
Less likely
Narrow transmission 
bottleneck (usually the 
majority variant is 
transmitted)
Number of 
new infections
Donor
Recipient 1
Recipient 2
Two variants 
co-circulate 
in this area
Co-circulation of multiple variants in diﬀerent geographical locations
Time
Epidemic
start date
Emergence of an
adaptive variant
New infections
Less fit variants
get purged
Fig. 2 | Levels of evolution from within hosts to between hosts. a, At the start 
of an acute infection, viral load increases rapidly for a period of time (tg) before 
the immune system begins to clear the infection, at which point the viral load 
starts to decrease until it returns to levels to below the detection threshold over 
a period of time (tc). During these periods, new variants may emerge as a result 
of mutations (virions in colour). b, At the point of transmission, major variants 
that are present at high frequency in the infection donor are more likely to pass 
through the narrow transmission bottleneck. However, sometimes a minor 
variant is passed on to a recipient host (shown in red) resulting in mutations 
getting passed on to the rest of the population. This illustrates the role of 
chance introduced by the transmission bottleneck in the evolution at the host 
population level. c, As the number of new infections grows over the course of an 
epidemic wave, new variants with selective advantage may emerge and reach 
high frequencies. Others, carrying deleterious mutations, get purged from the 
population. Superspreading events and transmission bottlenecks introduce an 
element of chance in determining the frequencies of variants in the population 
over time. d, As more variants emerge in the population, they can go on to seed 
new outbreaks in different geographical regions, which may lead to two or more 
variants co-circulating in the same region. Their genetic differences allow us to 
identify these different variants, infer their evolutionary origin and track their 
spread. When two or more distinct variants co-circulate in an area, this increases 
the risk of emergence of novel variants as a result of recombination.


--- Page 5 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
365
Review article
most of the observed genetic diversity at the between-host consensus 
level represents neutral or slightly deleterious mutations that over-
came the narrow transmission bottleneck owing to chance. This sto-
chasticity enables mutations without a strong selective advantage to 
circulate in the population and also reach high frequencies by chance, 
a process known as genetic drift. As well as the narrow transmission 
bottleneck, ‘superspreading’, whereby a small fraction of infectious 
hosts are responsible for the majority of transmissions57,58, is a further 
source of stochasticity and, hence, also contributes to genetic drift. 
Superspreading events increase stochasticity by introducing hetero-
geneity in the number of secondary infections, which in turn reduces 
the effective population size of a virus59.
The narrow transmission bottleneck often produces a founder 
effect, as only one or a few ‘founder’ viruses are the ancestors of all 
viruses during the new infection, and all infections in the subsequent 
chain of transmission. If a new outbreak is ultimately caused by a single 
founder-source individual, then all subsequent infections will have a 
similar viral consensus genotype. During the early stages of the pan-
demic, it proved difficult to establish whether a variant was increasing 
in frequency because it had an intrinsic advantage or due to factors such 
as drift or founder effects. In particular, the global fixation of the D614G 
mutation in early 2020 sparked debates about whether it was a result of 
natural selection or chance60. Later studies showed that this mutation 
actually gave this variant a near 20% transmissibility advantage over 
the original B.1 lineage61,62 (Fig. 2c,d).
Evolutionary phases of the pandemic
A period of apparent evolutionary stasis
After the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in humans, for the first nearly 
8 months the virus seemed to exhibit limited apparent evolution. This 
was partially due to the relatively small global virus population, while 
spread was still not ubiquitous, and later as a result of non-pharmaceu-
tical interventions in many parts of the world, and partially an artefact 
of virus undersampling. These factors, along with prior knowledge of 
the proofreading capacity of the coronavirus polymerase enzyme, led 
at the time to expectations that SARS-CoV-2 will evolve slowly, and that 
evolution will not play an important role in the unfolding and control 
of the pandemic. With the D614G substitution being the most notice-
able evolutionary change in April 2020, this period was characterized 
by limited examples of viral diversity and evolution.
Over this time period, the estimated substitution rate of SARS-
CoV-2 decreased by nearly 50%. This was mainly the result of incomplete 
purifying selection29, which over short timescales leaves an overabun-
dance of not yet purged deleterious mutations in the virus population. 
For this reason, the rates of evolution at smaller timescales, represented 
by the terminal branches on a phylogenetic tree, are elevated relative 
to longer-term evolution, represented by the internal branches in the 
phylogeny (Fig. 1a). This phenomenon is likely responsible for altering 
the estimated substitution rate also of other viruses over the course of 
epidemic waves29,63,64.
Emergence of highly divergent lineages
It took 8 months for the first divergent SARS-CoV-2 lineages to appear 
(Fig. 3a), marking a turning point in the pandemic from an evolutionary 
point of view. The first three such lineages, later termed VOCs Alpha, 
Beta and Gamma, emerged independently in different parts of the world 
and were the result of puzzling higher evolutionary rates. The sheer 
number of mutations involved in VOCs is particularly striking from 
an evolutionary point of view. Alpha and Gamma feature, respectively, 
14 and 11 extra non-synonymous mutations relative to their ancestral 
lineages whereas Omicron had more than a few dozen extra mutations 
in the spike gene65. These observations appear to have been generated 
by unusual circumstances most consistent with continued replication 
during chronic infections allowing the virus to acquire many evolution-
ary changes. This contrasts with the chain of acute infections typical for 
a respiratory virus, which enforces tight bottlenecks at transmissions, 
periodically purging mutations (see section on ‘Evolutionary origins 
of variants of concern’).
Although there is no significant difference between the overall 
evolutionary rate estimates for the non-VOC background and inside the 
VOC clades of the SARS-CoV-2 phylogenetic tree33,66,67, the substitution 
rate of the stem branch connecting the background to the VOC clades is 
approximately twofold to fourfold higher67,68 (Fig. 1b). This difference 
in evolutionary rate is only seen for non-synonymous substitutions, 
whereas the rate of synonymous substitutions is largely similar relative 
to within VOC clades and the non-VOC clades69.
Gradual within-lineage evolution
The discovery of Omicron in late November 2021, originally comprising 
three sister lineages (BA.1, BA.2 and BA.3), marked the start of a new 
phase of the pandemic, which, dissimilar to the preceding one that gave 
rise to highly divergent lineages, was dominated by successive sweeps 
of Omicron sub-lineages. Soon after BA.1 reached global dominance, it 
was replaced by BA.2, which further diversified into sub-lineages includ-
ing BA.2.12.1 and BA.2.75, and by BA.5, which reached high prevalence 
globally and is phylogenetically distinct from BA.2 sub-lineages70. Since 
the global dominance of BA.5, several sub-lineages of Omicron have 
emerged, but none of them have yet successfully outcompeted BA.5. 
Instead, they exhibit remarkable convergent evolution, with multiple 
shared mutations in the spike gene71.
Throughout 2021 and 2022, the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 was 
characterized by a steady increase in divergence within major line-
ages and a stepwise increase associated with each successive new 
major lineage, leading to a faster overall rate of evolution. These 
between-lineage evolutionary dynamics are compatible with a mole­
cular clock that is substantially faster than the within-lineage rate66,69. 
However, after the emergence of BA.5, it is now unclear whether 
SARS-CoV-2 will continue to evolve in this saltatory fashion with 
repeated emergence of highly divergent lineages, or whether it is 
transitioning to a more gradual adaptive process. In 2022, multiple line-
ages emerging within BA.2 and BA.5 were observed, in a more stepwise 
fashion, with several amino acid changes and moderate transmission 
advantages, which could indicate a shift to a more gradual stepwise 
evolution (see ‘Possible future scenarios’ for more discussion on this).
Transmissibility: the primary driver of SARS-CoV-2 
evolution
Evolution of intrinsic transmissibility
Parasites typically exist in a population of hosts, a highly fragmented 
environment with discrete and ephemeral habitats, where their intrinsic 
ability to transmit is a crucial fitness element72, particularly for obligate 
parasites such as viruses. For viruses causing acute infections, where 
the period of communicability is short, high transmissibility is an over-
riding trait73. In these viruses, transmissibility — usually expressed 
as the net reproduction number (Rt; the total number of secondary 
infections each case generates in a population) — is assumed to closely 
approximate their fitness at the host population level74. The continu-
ous evolution of these kinds of viruses towards higher transmissibility 


--- Page 6 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
366
Review article
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
2020 Jan
2020 Jun
Pre-VOC
S1 mutation
S1 mutation
Alpha
Delta
BA.1
BA.2
BA.5
BQ.1
2020 Nov
2021 Apr
2021 Sep
2022 Feb
2022 Jul
2022 Dec
0
10
20
30
2019 Dec
2020 May
2020 Oct
2021 Mar
2021 Aug
2022 Jan
2022 Jun
2022 Nov
B.351 (Beta, 20H)
B.1.1.7 (Alpha, 20I)
P.1 (Gamma, 20J)
B.1.617.2 (Delta, 21A)
B.1.617.2 (Delta, 21I)
B.1.617.2 (Delta, 21J)
B.1.427 and B.1.429 (Epsilon, 21C)
B.1.525 (Eta, 21D)
P.3 (Theta, 21E)
B.1.526 (Iota, 21F)
C.37 (Lambda, 21G)
B.1.621 (Mu, 21H)
BA.1 (Omicron, 21K)
BA.2 (Omicron, ~21L)
B.1.1.529 (Omicron, 21M)
BA.4 (Omicron, 22A)
BA.5 (Omicron, 22B)
BA.2.12.1 (Omicron, 22C)
BA.2.75 (Omicron, 22D)
BQ.1 (Omicron, 22E)
XBB (Omicron, 22F)
Pre-VOC
a
b
c
Sampling data
Mutational fitness
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0
10
20
30


--- Page 7 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
367
Review article
therefore can be understood as a straightforward evolutionary process 
of fitness maximization.
The process of transmission can be divided into three steps: shed-
ding of the virus from the infectious host; its survival and travel in the 
environment; and its establishment in the recipient macro­organism. 
Natural selection operates on specific traits of the virus that can 
facilitate each of these steps and increases in intrinsic transmissibility 
are the result of ongoing evolution in these transmission-enhancing 
traits (Fig. 4).
Optimizations of one such trait, for example the interaction 
between SARS-CoV-2 and the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) 
receptor (its primary cell entry route), increases the transmissibil-
ity of the virus in two ways: it elevates infectiousness by increasing 
the number of infected cells, thus boosting viral loads in mucosal 
secretions of infectious individuals; and it also enhances the ability 
of the viral lineage to establish infection in the new host75–77 (Fig. 4b). 
Mutations in the spike protein can enhance and stabilize its binding to 
the receptor. This was first observed with mutation D614G78,79. Later, 
VOCs Alpha, Delta and Omicron were found to carry mutations that 
further improved binding, N501Y in the receptor binding domain (RBD) 
being the best example80.
An essential factor for cell entry, through mediating membrane 
fusion, is the cleavage of the spike protein81. In the ferret model, the 
furin cleavage site insertion was essential for virus transmission82. 
Mutations P681H in Alpha and Omicron, and P681R in Delta, render 
the spike protein nearly fully cleaved, thus facilitating viral entry and, 
ultimately, intrinsic transmissibility83. Overall, mutations promoting 
receptor binding and spike cleavage seem to increase both infectious-
ness and infectivity, and improve the spread of the respective lineages. 
Nucleocapsid mutations (R203K + G204R) could enhance replica-
tion and transmissibility84. In Alpha, evolution outside spike seems to 
increase subgenomic RNA levels for the nucleocapsid, ORF9b and ORF6 
genes, leading to innate immune escape and improved transmission85.
Viruses can also enhance transmissibility by evolving tropism for 
a tissue or organ, which may be a better disseminating platform. Unlike 
the ancestral SARS-CoV-2 virus, which infected bronchial and lung 
cells, Omicron BA.1 evolved a preference for efficient replication in the 
nasopharynx, a better vantage point for entering aerosol86. Omicron 
BA.1 also appears to replicate faster than other VOCs in ex vivo bronchi 
cultures, but poorly in lung cells87.
Virion stability outside the host is also an integral component of 
intrinsic transmissibility and likely impacts viral fitness considerably. 
The ability of SARS-CoV-2 to remain in aerosols has been demonstrated 
to differ across lineages in the pandemic88. Studies of aerosol stability 
reveal a longer half-life presence of Alpha and Beta in comparison with 
the ancestral lineage, whereas Delta and Omicron were of comparable 
stability with it89. Another study found extremely low and similar virion 
longevity in aerosols across VOCs, further suggesting that unless differ-
ences between evolving lineages are considerable, stability in aerosols 
may not be a decisive factor in the evolution of transmissibility90.
Other than being intrinsically more transmissible, a virus can 
maximize its reproduction number (Rt) via prolonged infectiousness. 
The longer a host is infectious, the more secondary infections it can 
cause, thus increasing its Rt. Duration of infectiousness is therefore 
itself an evolvable trait91.
Considering two viruses with the same levels of intrinsic transmis-
sibility, one may transmit faster than the other, provided its period of 
infectiousness starts earlier. The latent period is an epidemiological 
property, representing the time between the moment of infection of 
an individual and the moment they start to be infectious to others. 
A shorter latent period means the host can infect sooner after being 
infected92, and for a given level of Rt this can cause epidemics with 
steeper growth93. An earlier onset of infectiousness was observed for 
Omicron BA.1 when compared with Delta94, yet its infectiousness was 
shown to last a shorter time95.
Transmissibility in immune populations: evolution of immune 
escape
RNA viruses are known to exhibit considerable degrees of antigenic 
evolution — adaptive changes in genomic regions encoding for targets 
of immunity. Antigenic drift often results in immune escape — the fail-
ure of humoral or cellular immunity to recognize or neutralize the 
pathogen. Whereas in naive host populations intrinsic transmissibility 
is the dominant adaptive property of viruses, in highly immune popu­
lations the ability to overcome host resistance becomes at least equally 
important as a fitness determinant. Even a highly transmissible virus 
will not be able to spread among resistant hosts. Allowing reinfection of 
immune individuals, immune escape mutations are effectively opening 
a new ecological niche for escape lineages — the niche of reinfections.
In SARS-CoV-2, signs of antigenic evolution were identified in 
late 2020 in VOCs Beta and Gamma, each found to carry mutations 
demonstrated to reduce antibody recognition and neutralization, 
particularly the E484K mutation. Early incidence data from South 
Africa and Brazil — the respective areas where these lineages were first 
identified — indicated higher reinfection rates in comparison with 
areas where other lineages circulated, illustrating the important role 
of immune escape mutations in maintaining high transmissibility in 
immune populations (Fig. 4c).
On emergence of Omicron in autumn 2021, it was quickly realized 
that this variant has a much higher capacity to cause reinfections than 
any variant before it96. Many of the major VOC mutations in the spike 
are found in the RBD and amino-terminal domain where neutralization 
antibody binding is the most potent97. Deep mutational scanning stud-
ies have provided rich data on the ability of these mutations to increase 
ACE2 binding affinity98, and to escape antibody binding99. In particular, 
they show the major impact of E484 (amino acid changes to K, P and 
Q) and N501 (amino acid changes to Y and T) sites on plasma antibody 
neutralization and ACE2 binding affinity of the virus, respectively.
With more than 30 amino acid substitutions and several dele-
tions and insertions, the first 2 lineages of Omicron (BA.1 and BA.2) 
Fig. 3 | SARS-CoV-2 lineage prevalence and mutation accumulation in S1 
subunit of spike. a, Frequency of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
2 (SARS-CoV-2) lineages over time. b,c, Accumulation of amino acid mutations 
in the S1 subunit over time (panel b) and as a function of their relative mutational 
fitness (panel c) shown for 3,055 globally representative genome samples 
of SARS-CoV-2 between December 2019 and December 2022 generated by 
nextstrain.org182. Mutational fitness is calculated using results from ref. 105 that 
computes the relative impact of each mutation in the growth advantage of a 
lineage using a hierarchical Bayesian regression model. The model estimates the 
exponential growth advantage of each SARS-CoV-2 lineage (proxy for measuring 
relative fitness) as a linear combination of the effect of individual mutations. Each 
Pango lineage (World Health Organization (WHO) label, Nextstrain clade) is given 
a unique colour. VOC, variant of concern.


--- Page 8 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
368
Review article
Transmissibility
Duration of
infectiousness
Early
infectiousness
Infectious-
ness
Infectivity
Survival
outside
host
Immune escape
Intrinsic
transmissibility
Shedding from
infectious host
Stages of viral transmission
Survival
outside host
Establishment
in a new host
Factors favouring
virus shedding
SARS-CoV-2
evolvable traits
• High viral loads
• Presence at 
sites favouring 
transmission
• Infection-promoting
symptoms (cough,
sneeze, increased
mucosal secretion) 
• Optimized ACE2
receptor interaction
• Cleavage of spike 
    protein
• Immune escape
• Change in tissue
tropism 
• Change in clinical
presentation  
Factors favouring
virus survival
SARS-CoV-2
evolvable traits
• Ability to survive in
aerosol
• Environmental
conditions
• Host density 
• Virion stability
• Resistance to
temperature, 
humidity, UV 
radiation, pH
• Not influenced by 
virus evolution 
Factors favouring
establishment of virus
SARS-CoV-2
evolvable traits
• Ease of cell entry
• Weakened host
resistance due to 
loss of antigen
recognition
• Weakened host
resistance due to 
waning immunity 
• Optimized ACE2
receptor interaction
• Optimized cleavage
of spike
• Immune escape
•
virus evolution
a
b
c
Elements of transmissibility 
aﬀected by viral evolution
Eﬀects on SARS-CoV-2 epidemiological outcomes
 
R0 
Rt 
Generation  
Incidence  
Prevalence 
Reinfection  
Epidemic  
Burden of 
 
 
 
interval  
of infection  
of infection  rates  
growth rate  disease
Intrinsic transmissibility
Duration of infectiousness
Early onset of infectiousness
Immune escape
a/
a/
a/
     = Eﬀect         = No eﬀect
Fig. 4 | The evolution of transmissibility. a, Relationships between the key 
elements that contribute to transmissibility: intrinsic transmissibility, immune 
escape and temporal aspects of infectiousness, such as time of onset and 
duration of infectiousness. b, Evolvable viral traits affect intrinsic transmissibility 
of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by influencing 
mechanistic factors contributing to the transmission process at each of its 
three stages. Evolution in these SARS-CoV-2 traits can ultimately increase 
transmissibility. c, Transmission-enhancing properties of SARS-CoV-2 influenced 
by viral evolution, and their effect on important epidemiological parameters 
and population outcomes. aOnly in combination with immune escape. ACE2, 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; R0, basic reproduction number; Rt, net 
reproduction number.


--- Page 9 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
369
Review article
were significantly more divergent in relation to earlier VOCs65. The 
new mutations that arose in these Omicron sub-lineages, also mainly 
clustering in the RBD, have caused significant reductions in the neu-
tralization titres of sera from individuals who are naturally infected or 
vaccinated100,101 but may have only had marginal influence on their ACE2 
binding affinity102. The descendants of BA.4 and BA.5 lineages contain 
further mutations in the RBD relative to the earlier Omicron lineages 
including L452R and F486V, shown to contribute significantly to their 
immune escape properties103. Sera from individuals who are vaccinated 
and boosted also exhibited reduced neutralization of these lineages, 
compared with BA.1 and BA.2 (ref. 103).
The S1 subunit, containing the RBD and N-terminal domain that 
possess a substantial number of mutations shared among these new 
highly divergent and evasive variants, exhibits a strong signal of adap-
tive evolution, mainly reflecting the increased ability of these lineages 
to transmit in immune populations, and particularly after the emer-
gence of Omicron104 (Fig. 3a). Predictably, these mutations were also 
associated with aspects of increased fitness105 (Fig. 3c).
The contribution of viral escape from cell-mediated immunity in 
driving the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 is less well defined than that of 
escape from humoral immunity. The majority of T cell epitopes are 
invariant between the prototype strains and VOCs106–108. The spike 
mutation P272L was shown to result in immune escape of a dominant 
T cell epitope109, and several other mutations in T cell epitopes reduced 
or directly abrogated MHC class I presentation110.
Besides natural immunity, vaccination can also be a driver for 
immune escape. The crucial difference for SARS-CoV-2, in particular, 
is the lack of mucosal immunity following parenteral vaccination. 
Because the virus can still replicate in the mucosa of the upper res-
piratory tract and transmit, the role of vaccination as a factor driving 
SARS-CoV-2 evolution may be less pronounced compared with that 
of natural infection. Another important difference to natural infec-
tion is the much narrower antigenic region targeted by most popular 
vaccines, that is, the spike protein or even just the RBD. This naturally 
limits the drive for escape pressure to just these regions. Vaccination-
related immune escape has nevertheless been shown for both Beta and 
Omicron111, expectedly with a focus on the anti-RBD-induced antibodies. 
Escape from vaccine-elicited humoral immunity was further demon-
strated for the Delta variant112. While mass vaccination with ancestral 
strains may create a more constant and predictable immune pres-
sure, the spread and ongoing evolution of the pathogen render natural 
immunity a much more dynamic selective force. The changing immune 
landscape will mean that, at any time, a variant that has high escape to 
its immune landscape will spread rapidly through the population and 
can, potentially, outcompete variants triggering immunity.
Waning immunity, which is the decline of immune protection over 
time and characteristic for immunity to SARS-CoV-2, is a factor likely 
to slow down the population-level evolution of immune escape of the 
virus. Because of waning immunity, those fully resistant to reinfection 
will typically be fewer than those with partial immunity, so intrinsically 
transmissible viral lineages can maintain high fitness even without 
immune escape in non-naive populations.
The evolution of virulence
The term virulence is defined differently across disciplines. In ecology, 
virulence is formally defined as the degree of reduction in the fitness 
of a host attributed to a parasite113. In clinical medicine and experimen-
tal health sciences, often the synonym ‘pathogenicity’ is preferred to 
denote the degree of harm a pathogen causes to a host. Pathogenicity 
in clinical medicine can also be described in terms of the specific symp-
toms a pathogen causes. Unlike virulence and pathogenicity, which 
characterize the pathogen, the related term ‘severity’ is used to describe 
the gravity of a clinical condition.
Virulence is not an actual trait in the biological sense. It is, rather, 
an interaction property, that is, the product of the ecological relation-
ship between two species — a host and a parasite. This ‘relativity’ of viru-
lence is well illustrated by the fact that the same pathogen can exhibit 
very different levels of virulence when infecting different host species. 
As an ecological outcome from complex, multifactorial interactions, 
virulence is difficult to model or predict, but an understanding of its 
component processes can, in part, provide some predictions about 
its evolution.
Changes in pathogenicity were first reported for Alpha. Thereafter, 
all subsequent VOCs before Omicron (Beta, Gamma and Delta) were 
causing increased hospitalizations and mortality rate in comparison 
with the ancestral lineage114–116. The later emerging Omicron BA.1 and 
BA.2 lineages were both associated with lower disease severity com-
pared with the ancestral strain36,117, and virulence levels of different 
variants did not exhibit any directional pattern. Such comparisons 
are of course challenging as not only the viral lineages are subject to 
change. So is the resistance status of hosts, due to widespread vaccina-
tion or previous infections, meaning that Omicron spread has occurred 
against a background of much higher population immunity levels. Most 
virulence studies for SARS-CoV-2 are understandably focused on the 
role of the spike protein, but other parts of the genome also contribute 
to this property. In animal models, chimeric viruses carrying the spike 
protein of Omicron BA.1 within a backbone genome from the ancestral 
virus demonstrated the existence of virulence factors in other parts of 
the SARS-CoV-2 genome in addition to the important role of the spike 
protein for virulence118–120.
A popular and incorrect view on the evolution of virulence, fre-
quently expressed in the context of SARS-CoV-2, is that in the long 
run, pathogens will tend to evolve to be decreasingly virulent121. The 
reasoning being that highly virulent pathogens will short-sightedly kill 
their host and inevitably perish with it. There are crucial flaws in this 
oversimplistic logic. First, it ignores the fact that the actual adaptive 
environment of viruses is not a single host but a population of hosts. 
For many pathogens, severe disease manifestations postdate transmis-
sion to a new host. SARS-CoV-2 tends to cause severe disease or death 
late, towards the third week post infection, whereas the infectious 
period usually spans from day 2 to day 15, with 90% of transmission 
already achieved before the average time of death. As long as a viral 
lineage successfully carries on transmitting further to multiple other 
hosts, the ultimate fate of the initial host will not substantially impact 
its fitness. In this situation, high virulence is not a fitness impediment 
for the virus and would not be selected against.
Except in rare and unusual circumstances122,123, microorganisms 
do not directly benefit from virulence. Yet it could correlate with other 
traits of the pathogen, which are adaptive. In other words, increas-
ing virulence can be a by-product of viral evolution, where the virus 
evolves to maximize other traits that increase its fitness, but that are 
linked to virulence. An example of this situation is SARS-CoV-2 viral 
loads. Increased viral abundance contributes to better chances of 
transmission — a crucial fitness trait for the virus. Yet higher loads may 
also result in more severe disease. In such a situation, a virus may evolve 
higher virulence, if there is a net gain in fitness.
An additional important and underappreciated point related to 
virulence is that highly transmissible pathogens (whether due to high 


--- Page 10 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
370
Review article
intrinsic transmissibility or immune escape) with lower infection fatal-
ity ratios can contribute to high population-level disease burdens, over-
shadowing in that respect extremely pathogenic but less transmissible 
pathogens (Fig. 4c). Examples of this are MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, 
where the former, despite a staggering infection fatality ratio of more 
than 30% has, due to its relatively low transmissibility, caused a total 
of 935 deaths since 2012 (ref. 124). By contrast, SARS-CoV-2, with an 
estimated infection fatality rate well under 1%, has as of today killed 
more than 18 million people125.
Due to the multifactorial and ecological nature of virulence, and 
due to the paucity of reliable estimates for many of the parameters 
involved, the evolution of virulence is difficult to model or predict. 
Given the relative timing between transmission and severe disease, 
and life history links between virulence and adaptive traits, we know 
we cannot rely on evolutionary forces to necessarily reduce virulence 
as the virus adapts long term to its host population. Depending on a 
combination of specific circumstances, SARS-CoV-2 virulence could 
go up or down.
Evolutionary origins of variants of concern
From Alpha to Omicron
In late December 2020, a new SARS-CoV-2 lineage was identified to 
be expanding rapidly in parts of the United Kingdom, carrying a large 
number of mutations in the spike region126,127. This lineage, later Pango 
classified as B.1.1.7 (ref. 128), was named by the World Health Organi-
zation (WHO) VOC Alpha129. In the ensuing weeks, South Africa and 
Brazil reported two additional rapidly growing lineages — VOCs Beta 
(Pango lineage B.1.351)114 and Gamma (Pango lineage P.1)130. Each of 
these featured a large number of genetic differences with respect to 
the background viral population, some bearing signatures of enhanced 
transmissibility or immune escape properties131,132. The Delta lineage 
(Pango lineage B.1.617.2), recognized as a VOC in May 2021 but circulat-
ing for months before this in India133, rapidly replaced previous VOCs 
and led to a drastic surge in cases around the world134,135. In November 
2021, Omicron65,136 (Pango lineages BA.1–BA.5), discovered in South 
Africa and Botswana, started new global waves of infection. Although 
these VOCs emerged in different parts of the world, they shared sets 
of mutations (for example, N501Y, E484K and ΔH69/V70), indicat-
ing possible convergent evolution97,137,138. Each of these VOCs had a 
significantly higher growth advantage relative to their predecessor 
variants105.
Although Alpha was the first VOC to be discovered, phylo-
genetic estimates suggest Beta likely emerged earlier, before June 
2020 (ref. 114), months before it was reported in October 2020. The 
emergence of Alpha was estimated to be in early September 2020 and 
Gamma in mid-November 2020 (refs. 68,139). Intermediate Alpha-like 
and Gamma-like genomes were detected, appearing several months 
before their respective VOC clades first emerged68,139. The origin and 
beginning of the spread of Delta within India are uncertain, but phylo-
genetic estimates based on global data suggest that it emerged in mid-
October 2020 (ref. 140). Unlike the other VOCs, following its discovery 
Delta did not increase substantially in frequency until much later in 
March 2021 (ref. 140). The first three lineages of Omicron (BA.1, BA.2 and 
BA.3) all emerged independently around the same time in October 2021 
(ref. 65), followed by BA.4 in mid-December 2021 and BA.5 in January 
2022 (ref. 136). The emergence of the BA.3 lineage has been suggested 
to be a result of an ancestral recombination event between BA.1 and 
BA.2 (ref. 65). Also, the emergence of the newly identified BA.4/BA.5 
lineages was likely through a prior inter-lineage recombination event114.
The mechanisms of the evolutionary origin of VOCs are still a 
matter of debate. Several hypotheses have been put forward to explain 
their emergence: sustained stealth circulation of SARS-CoV-2 in humans 
in areas with poor genomic surveillance; zoonotic circulation of 
SARS-CoV-2 in animal reservoirs; and chronic SARS-CoV-2 infections 
in certain individuals who are immunocompromised (Fig. 5).
Hypothesis 1: undetected circulation in humans
The global genomic surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 has been over-
whelmingly more detailed than that of any other pathogen (Fig. 3), 
yet extremely uneven with many low- and middle-income countries 
sequencing <0.5% of their cases. This extreme undersampling leads 
to some viral lineages circulating undetected, allowing for long-term 
stealth viral evolution141,142. This applies particularly for countries with 
limited genomic surveillance that experienced sustained circulation of 
the virus during the pandemic143,144. Inadequate genomic surveillance 
can further under-detect SARS-CoV-2 chronic infections, which can in 
turn further contribute to undetected viral evolution (see ‘Hypothesis 
3: human chronic infections’; Fig. 5).
From an evolutionary perspective, the emergence of a novel and 
highly transmissible variant with, say, 12 novel mutations through the 
gradual accumulation of substitutions at a rate of 2 changes per month 
would require that variant to remain undetected for nearly 6 months 
before it would be reported. The accrual of mutations could happen 
faster if some of the mutations are advantageous for the virus and can 
reach high frequencies faster. However, Delta and Omicron spread 
throughout the world in a matter of only a few months. Given global 
interconnectedness, such an evolving lineage is likely to be intercepted 
at earlier stages of this mutation accumulation process. Furthermore, 
unless the evolution of the virus is accelerated, a lineage could not 
acquire 10–12 mutations above what would be expected given the 
substitution rate just through gradual accumulation of substitutions. 
Therefore, the emergence of a novel variant in transmission chains of 
multiple acute infections does not seem likely145.
Hypothesis 2: circulation in animals
Despite a broad range of animal hosts that are permissive to the virus, 
just three animal species are known to effectively transmit SARS-CoV-2: 
Syrian hamsters, mink and white-tailed deer — the only known wildlife 
reservoir at present146–149. To date, no specific viral genetic adaptations 
have been observed in the Syrian hamster. Mutations in SARS-CoV-2 
found in mink and white-tailed deer both appear animal host-specific. 
Mutations in isolates from mink improve viral binding to the mink 
ACE2 receptor, whereas isolates from white-tailed deer are found to 
carry changes predominantly outside the spike protein150,151. Although 
the N501Y spike mutation found in VOCs Alpha, Beta and Delta allows 
these variants to infect wild-type mice, this is likely a coincidence 
resulting from evolution in human hosts, rather than an adaptation 
to this animal80. N501Y is also present in the Omicron spike protein, 
but infection of Balb/C laboratory mice was inefficient with Omicron 
BA.1. Yet infectivity markedly improved when mice were challenged 
with a chimeric virus with an Omicron spike and an ancestral back-
bone120, suggesting that other mutations outside the spike region 
might also be responsible for susceptibility in mice, a finding that 
has been confirmed in K18-hACE2 transgenic mice, which express 
human ACE2 (ref. 119).
Divergent SARS-CoV-2 sequences in farmed mink in the 
Netherlands and white-tailed deer in Canada show signatures of accel-
erated evolution and potential for animal-to-human transmission151,152. 


--- Page 11 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
371
Review article
However, the combination of mutations in these viruses is very different 
from those found in VOCs in humans, suggesting a different evolution-
ary path. This is further substantiated by data showing an ongoing 
adaptation of these strains to a new animal host such as the white- tailed 
deer151, even if the potential for viral spillback to humans remains.
All pre-Omicron lineages featured similar infection and viru-
lence patterns across Syrian hamsters, K18-hACE2 transgenic mice 
and ferrets. Yet Omicron BA.1 was unable to infect ferrets, a further 
indication that its evolution may not be an adaptation to animals118,153,154. 
Furthermore, passaging of SARS-CoV-2 in, or adaptation to, an animal 
species is unlikely to elicit human immune escape properties, which 
is a central feature of most VOCs155. In fact, the numerous mutations 
that occur predominantly in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, driving 
considerable immune escape in humans, strongly point to long-term 
evolution in humans, already described in individuals who are immuno-
suppressed156. Omicron specifically appears to be a product of adapta-
tion to humans, and only few particularly susceptible animal species 
such as the Syrian hamster can be efficiently infected in the laboratory. 
Currently, no convincing arguments that support the origin of VOCs in 
animal reservoirs exist. Nevertheless, due to the longer-term risks of 
reverse spillover, the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 in new animal reservoirs 
such as the white-tailed deer needs to be monitored and studied closely.
Hypothesis 3: human chronic infections
Prolonged shedding of SARS-CoV-2 has been reported in individuals 
who are immunocompromised, due to, for example, some cancers, 
immunosuppressive therapy or AIDS157,158. In such individuals a deficient 
immune system can fail to clear the virus on acute infection, leading 
to long-term viral persistence. Given the large number of amino acid 
changes in viral lineages sampled from chronic infections, it has been 
hypothesized that such infections are responsible for the emergence 
of the multiple highly divergent variants of SARS-CoV-2 (ref. 159). Key 
evidence in support of this hypothesis is the observation that sets of 
mutations identified from chronic infections are also shared by VOCs. 
Examples of such mutations are E484K (seen in Beta and Gamma), 
N501Y (Alpha, Beta and Gamma), ΔH69–V70 (Alpha, Eta and some 
Omicron variants), H655Y (Mu) and R346I (Omicron)160. Further, 
the extremely low number of synonymous mutations accumulated 
Undetected 
individual
Sustained undetected circulation
Detection in a region 
with strong surveillance
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 3
Hypothesis 1
Transmission to the 
rest of the population
Spillover event
Spillback 
into humans
Emergence of a 
VOC
Spillover circulation
in wildlife
Chronic infection
Treatment
Fig. 5 | Hypotheses for the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. 
Hypothesis 1: the virus can circulate, causing acute infections within a region 
lacking adequate genomic surveillance for a sustained period of time and gradually 
acquiring adaptive changes without being detected until it reaches another 
region with stronger genomic surveillance. Hypothesis 2: people in close contact 
with farmed or wild animals such as mink or deer can transmit the virus to these 
populations, where severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
can acquire further adaptive changes on circulation in those animal populations 
before a spillback into humans, leading to the emergence of variants of concern 
(VOCs). Hypothesis 3: if the virus persists in an individual who is chronically infected 
for a long period, it may acquire changes that are adaptations to host immune 
responses. Further adaptive changes may occur if the patient is under treatment to 
clear the infection (for example, monoclonal antibodies or convalescent plasma) 
that may accelerate selection for antibody evasion mutations.


--- Page 12 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
372
Review article
in the spike of Omicron, in stark contrast to the very high numbers of 
non-synonymous ones69, is consistent with the currently most credible 
hypothesis for the origin of VOCs, that is, through evolution during 
chronic infection. A low number of synonymous mutations are a sign of 
low rates of neutral evolution, which might be an indirect indication 
of low numbers of transmission bottlenecks in the near past, supporting 
a scenario of long-term evolution in a persistent infection in a single 
individual, rather than a chain of transmissions145. Divergent cryptic 
viral lineages containing previously unsampled mutations isolated 
from urban wastewater, which come from specific geographically 
restricted parts of the sewage system, are another indirect signal for 
possible human chronic infection161.
It is thought that selection in individuals who are chronically 
infected is likely driven by treatments (Box 1), such as convalescent 
plasma or monoclonal antibodies, and/or by weak immune responses 
sufficient to exert a selection pressure on the viral population, but 
insufficient to clear it, yet other selective pressures such as recep-
tor binding158 or replication capacity are also possible. Given that 
antibody-based therapies for individuals who are chronically infected 
predominantly target the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, we may expect 
them to select for changes that are concentrated in the spike and 
for immune escape mutations that will facilitate reinfections, such 
as those found in many of the VOCs157. Importantly, forward trans-
mission of mutations from patients wo are chronically infected has 
Box 1
SARS-CoV-2 evolution of resistance to treatment
Drug resistance typically arises when a virus is not effectively 
suppressed by an antiviral drug and replicates in its presence. Any 
emergent mutations that confer even partial resistance to the drug 
will provide their carrier lineage with a competitive advantage and 
help it outcompete other non-resistant variants. Such treatment 
failure directly produces acquired resistance within a person who 
is infected, which has the effect of reducing or even eliminating 
the antiviral properties. If lineages that acquired resistance are 
then transmitted, a phenomenon known as transmitted resistance, 
this may quickly amplify the frequency of the resistant mutation 
in the host population. Transmission of resistant virus depends 
on the intensity with which individuals undergoing drug treatment 
shed resistant virus, the transmissibility of resistant virus relative 
to wild-type virus and the treatment regime183.
Antiviral drug resistance has been plaguing the treatment 
of many viral infections with the prominent examples of human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and influenza 
virus184,185, and antiviral drug resistance has also been reported for 
other coronaviruses186. Studies of the phenomenon in influenza 
virus evolution show that drug-resistant viruses emerge rapidly on 
the beginning of treatment183,187 and that high viral loads and long 
viraemia increase the probability of fixation of a resistance mutation 
in a viral lineage188. Furthermore, the threshold for drug resistance 
development can be low when monotherapy is applied whereas 
combination therapy considerably raises the resistance threshold184,189, 
indicating that combination therapies with antivirals or monoclonal 
antibodies are a treatment strategy superior to monotherapy190,191.
Different antiviral regimens have been employed in an attempt 
to treat patients with COVID-19. This initially included monoclonal 
antibodies, polyclonal antibodies and specific antiviral drugs 
developed against other pathogens, such as remdesivir. In December 
2021, two novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2)-specific antiviral drugs (Paxlovid and molnupiravir) 
were nearly simultaneously licensed192. In vitro studies have shown 
multiple evolutionary pathways leading to SARS-CoV-2 resistance to 
remdesivir, demonstrating the potential of resistance development 
and the need to investigate their in vivo significance in clinical 
studies193,194. Furthermore, two independent in vitro studies both 
demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 develops resistance to nirmatrelvir, 
the active component of Paxlovid195.
The specific mechanism of action of the new drug molnupiravir 
deserves further attention in the context of viral evolution. The 
mechanism of action of this class of mutagenic antiviral is lethal 
mutagenesis, which pushes the virus to extinction by increasing its 
mutation rate above its error threshold196. Failure to rapidly suppress 
the virus in an environment of hypermutation, often as a result of poor 
patient compliance, might produce a rich cocktail of viral variants, 
potentially stimulating rapid within-host evolution of the virus. Such 
rapid evolution could facilitate the emergence of higher fidelity 
mutants more resistant to the mutagenic effects of molnupiravir197, 
potentially leading to a notable excess of transitions compared with 
transversions198, although high-fidelity variants resistant to mutagenic 
drugs were previously shown to otherwise exhibit lower fitness199,200. 
Molnupiravir signature patterns were identified in sequences sampled 
across diverse global locations201, indicating that hypermutagenic 
antivirals may need to be closely monitored.
Experimental results indicate the emergence of resistance 
mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein after in vitro passaging 
in the presence of SARS-CoV-2-specific monoclonal antibodies202,203. 
SARS-CoV-2 in individuals treated with monoclonal antibody 
monotherapy following the emergence of resistance mutations 
showed a dynamic evolution characterized by immune escape, 
altered replication kinetics, an extended period of elevated viral loads 
and rebound of clinical symptoms204. Meanwhile, in patients with 
mild or moderate COVID-19, resistance to monoclonal antibodies 
such as bamlanivimab was substantially reduced when given as a 
combination with etesevimab205. Polyclonal antibodies have also 
been explored and mapped for evolution of escape, indicating that 
escape is still possible despite the presence of antibodies that target 
diverse epitopes206,207.
Although in vitro and, especially, clinical data are still scarce, 
assessing the risk of emergence of resistance, both within host and 
population wide, is pivotal to preserve the long-term effectiveness 
of SARS-CoV-2 antivirals. Long experience from antiviral treatment of 
other viruses, such as HIV, demonstrates that combination therapy 
minimizes the emergence of resistant mutants.


--- Page 13 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
373
Review article
Glossary
Antibody neutralization
The blocking of viral replication in a host 
as a result of antibody binding to the 
virus. Often this is due to binding of 
the antibody to viral structures involved 
in interactions with cellular receptors, 
resulting in blocking of cell entry.
Basic reproduction number
(R0). The average total number of 
secondary infections that a single 
infectious case produces in a totally 
susceptible population of hosts. 
A measure of transmissibility.
Consensus sequence
The sequence obtained by taking the 
most common base at each nucleotide 
position along the genome from the 
often genetically diverse population in 
a sample.
Duration of infectiousness
The duration of the period in which 
a host is infectious with a specific 
pathogen. This can vary from a few days 
to decades or even a lifetime in different 
pathogens.
Effective population size
The size of an idealized population, 
which determines the changes in 
gene frequency as a result of genetic 
drift and the effectiveness of selection 
relative to drift. An intuitive explanation 
of this abstract term is that the effective 
population size approximates the 
number of individuals in a population 
who are actually reproducing and 
leaving progeny.
Endemic persistence
An epidemiological state where a 
pathogen exists at long-term stable 
prevalence in the host population, 
neither increasing nor decreasing. 
Endemic persistence implies neither 
low virulence nor low prevalence of 
the pathogen, but these are often 
incorrectly assumed attributes of the 
term, confusing debates on the subject.
Fitness
The reproductive success of an 
organism. For viruses spreading in 
a host population, fitness is often 
approximated by the net reproduction 
number (Rt) — the number of new 
infections with a viral variant a 
single infectious person produces 
in the population.
Founder effect
The loss of genetic diversity 
in the population as a result of a 
new population being established 
by a small number of individuals. It is 
a consequence of the transmission 
bottleneck, significantly influenced by 
chance and contributes to genetic drift.
Genetic drift
Changes in a nucleotide character 
frequency at a genomic site in a 
population over time due to chance. 
Drift enables some characters to 
become common despite a lack of 
selective advantage, or even if mildly 
deleterious.
Immune escape
The ability of a virus to partially or 
fully evade immune recognition 
or neutralization. Here we only focus 
on mutational immune escape, 
which results from virus evolution.
Infection fatality ratio
The ratio of the number of deaths caused 
by a pathogen infection to the number 
of individuals infected by the pathogen. 
It is a measure of the infection severity 
and the virulence of the pathogen 
(often also called the ‘infection fatality 
rate’, despite not being a rate).
Infectiousness
The intensity with which a pathogen is 
expelled by an infectious host, usually 
as a result of high infectious loads, 
infectiousness promoting symptoms 
and presence in tissues or fluids, which 
are important in its transmission route.
Infectivity
The ability of a pathogen to take 
foothold in a new host and establish 
infection.
Intrinsic transmissibility
The capacity of an infectious agent to 
move successfully from an infectious 
host to a susceptible one, successfully 
establishing infection in it. This includes 
the intensity with which it is expelled 
by the infectious host, its ability to 
resist factors in the environment while 
in transit and its ability to establish in 
a new susceptible host.
Latent period
The duration between the moment 
of infection of an individual host and 
the moment that host starts to be 
infectious to others; characterizes 
infectious agents.
Most recent common 
ancestor
The most recent individual from which 
a group of individuals in the population 
are descended.
Mutation rate
The probability of mutation, usually 
measured per nucleotide per replication 
cycle.
Mutations
Changes in the genome of the virus, 
usually occurring as a result of errors 
during replication.
Net reproduction number
(Rt). The average total number of 
secondary infections that a single 
infectious case produces in a 
real population of hosts, where 
epidemiological control measures 
may be applied and a proportion 
of the population may be immune.
Recombination
The combining of genetic material from 
two different viruses during replication, 
producing an offspring virus carrying 
a portion of the genetic material from 
either parent.
Severity
The gravity of a clinical condition 
or infection.
Substitution rate
(Also known as evolutionary rate). 
The rate at which new mutations 
accumulate in a viral population, usually 
measured per nucleotide site per year.
Superspreading
A situation whereby a particular 
setting, circumstances or an infectious 
individual are responsible for the 
transmission of a pathogen to a 
disproportionately large number 
of people.
Transmissibility
The intensity with which an infectious 
agent moves between hosts in a 
real setting, where hosts may have 
prior immunity. Besides intrinsic 
transmissibility of the pathogen, 
this includes immune evasion 
as well as temporal components 
such as duration and time of onset 
of infectiousness.
Transmission bottleneck
The infinitesimal number of viral 
particles that establish the viral 
population in a new host on 
transmission. Usually, these are a 
minuscule and often genetically 
unrepresentative sample from the 
virus population in the original host, 
which contributes to genetic drift.
Variant of interest
As defined by the World Health 
Organization, a severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 variant with 
genetic changes predicted or known 
to affect its transmissibility, disease 
severity, immune escape, or diagnostic 
or therapeutic escape, causing 
significant community transmission, 
in multiple countries, increasing in 
frequency, causing increasing number 
of cases and suggesting an emerging 
risk to global health.
Variants of concern
(VOCs). Variants that, in addition to the 
criteria for a variant of interest listed 
above, are associated with an increase 
in transmissibility, an increase in 
virulence or a decrease in effectiveness 
of public health measures, diagnostics, 
vaccines and therapeutics at a degree 
of global health significance.
Virulence
Casually defined as the degree of harm 
a pathogen causes to a host.


--- Page 14 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
374
Review article
been detected160,162. Settings with high levels of monoclonal anti-
body use (perhaps care homes) could have provided an environment 
that generates viral diversity that can be quickly passed on between 
individuals.
Although clear evidence of selection has been observed in some 
individuals who are chronically infected, there is still no consistent 
understanding of a clear pattern of the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 across 
all chronic infections, or how common the emergence of transmission-
enhancing variants during these infections is. Some of the globally 
occurring spike mutations in VOCs such as P681H/R, for example, are 
not observed in some patients with chronic infections. A potential 
explanation for this may be a trade-off between immune escape muta-
tions and transmissibility, which, unlike viruses in chronic infections, 
the globally transmitting viral lineages are likely subject to163. It is 
also unclear which forms of immunosuppression are associated with 
chronic infection, and their prevalence within the population is uncer-
tain164. Overall, given the current evidence in support of chronic infec-
tions generating immune-evading mutations, it is reasonable to assume 
that such infections are likely responsible for the emergence of at least 
some of the VOCs. This suggests that finding and treating individuals 
who are chronically infected must be a high public health priority165. 
Further, understanding the evolutionary dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 
during chronic infections can provide a window into future potential 
emerging immune escape variants166.
Possible future scenarios
Until late 2021, before the emergence of Omicron, VOCs such as Alpha 
and Delta were mainly associated with increased transmissibility and 
modest degrees of immune escape167. However, current evidence 
suggests that immune escape properties were the main driver for the 
displacement of Delta by Omicron65. This implies that, over longer 
timescales, depending on the intrinsic transmissibility of future line-
ages and the degree of cross-immunity between them, one can imagine 
scenarios where two or more lineages co-circulate, or alternatively 
where one drives others to extinction. Such an interplay could have 
profound public health implications, depending on the transmissibil-
ity and virulence of the dominant lineage, and on the immunological 
landscape into which antigenically distinct lineages are introduced. For 
example, it is possible to envisage a scenario where waning immunity 
plus antigenic distinctiveness could periodically lead to new waves 
of infection.
A few studies have shown that some key, variant-defining muta-
tions with ACE2-mediated transmissibility or resistance to population-
level immunity could potentially be identified much earlier than the 
emergence of a new VOC98,168. However, many of these mutations may 
not pose a public health threat, unless in the presence of others. For 
example, the variant of interest Theta had a constellation of mutations 
that alerted scientists because it included defining mutations such as 
D614G, N501Y and E484K in the spike protein, yet its spread was lim-
ited. An effective early warning system for future VOCs requires rich 
information about variants, such as intrinsic transmissibility, tropism, 
immune escape, virulence and susceptibility to available treatments, 
linked to epidemiological data, such as the relative transmissibility 
of circulating variants and secondary attack rates from household 
transmission studies167,169. It may be possible to develop models that 
can predict some of these features from sequence data alone168,170. 
Wastewater surveillance provides a complementary source of sequence 
information171 and can reveal the cryptic transmission of variants in 
advance of their identification in individuals172. The role of immune 
escape mutations and their prediction will pose substantial challenges, 
as their fitness consequences depend on the immunity landscape. The 
Beta and Gamma VOCs for example, despite their local advantage, did 
not spread substantially outside the areas they were initially identi-
fied in, and Omicron BA.1 was outcompeted in animal models by both 
Alpha and Delta118.
With the caveats mentioned above, we can imagine a possible 
best-case scenario for the future evolution of SARS-CoV-2 whereby 
there will be continued antigenic drift within the Omicron lineage, 
such that over short and medium timescales, immunity elicited by a 
combination of vaccination and prior infection protects against severe 
disease on reinfection173,174, and provides broad immune responses 
that will cover considerable continued evolution of the virus175,176. In a 
best-case scenario, perhaps the majority of future fitness improving 
mutations will be limited to escape from host immunity. From the cur-
rent trend of Omicron variants, we might expect a new wave of infection 
for every additional ~4  months of virus circulation136, although we have 
no way of knowing whether this periodicity would be maintained. As 
an illustration, if we imagined that SARS-CoV-2 infection fatality ratios 
in individuals with prior immunity were similar to those of seasonal 
influenza, we can expect two to three times the burden of influenza 
annually. This ignores any additional burden resulting from post-
acute COVID-19 sequelae (also known as long COVID)177. Under this 
scenario, the longer-term impact of the virus would be determined by 
its levels of pathogenicity. The expectation is that it would also begin 
to follow a more regular seasonal incidence pattern, similar to other 
human coronaviruses178 (Box 2). The summer outbreaks of 2022 by 
Omicron-derived lineages hint that a regular seasonal pattern may 
not arrive soon.
A likely alternative to the best-case scenario is that antigenic evo-
lution would be disrupted by the emergence of a new variant with 
a completely different constellation of mutations and phenotypic 
properties, which will allow the virus to evade immunity established 
by prior infection or vaccines. This could occur through accelerated 
evolution of the virus during long-term persistence within individuals 
who are immunocompromised who happen to carry a more basal strain 
of SARS-CoV-2 from a period when a completely different variant was 
circulating. A case in point is that both strains circulating in the white-
tailed deer, the only known new reservoir in wildlife151, and a cryptic 
lineage found in urban wastewater161 feature pre-Omicron and even 
pre-VOC basal strains, demonstrating the continued persistence of 
basal strains. The unpredictability of the evolution of virulence could 
mean that such lineages are more virulent than Omicron, perhaps 
causing severe disease in more people. In such a case, the overall public 
health impact would be determined by the balance between severity 
of infections and residual population cross-immunity.
The emergence of VOCs and potential future antigenically distinct 
lineages can be thought of as ‘shift-like events’, which are unexpected, 
significant changes in the genetic make-up of the virus and, potentially, 
in its clinically relevant properties. Typical potential generators of 
shifts are recombinations. Although there is currently no evidence 
suggesting that recombination was involved in the origin of any VOCs, 
including Omicron65,179, recombination remains a continuing potential 
source of concern. Recombination events between highly divergent 
lineages have the capacity to bring potential adverse phenotypic 
properties together, for example, combining mutations that confer 
immune escape properties from one lineage with those that enhance 
transmissibility (and potentially also virulence) from another. Although 
likely not originating from recombination, the emergence events of 


--- Page 15 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
375
Review article
each VOC bear the characteristics of a shift-like event. After what is 
believed to have been a long period of cryptic evolution, each VOC 
appeared unexpectedly, carried a large number of mutations and had 
considerably altered epidemiological or clinical characteristics. It is 
difficult to predict which part of viral genetic diversity future major 
lineages will originate from and whether they will result from ‘shift-like’ 
or more gradual, ‘drift-like’ evolution akin to that within the Omicron 
clade throughout 2022.
Box 2
Emergence and evolution of SARS-CoV-2 and other human 
coronaviruses
Several coronaviruses are known to infect humans seasonally or 
have recently emerged from zoonotic sources, the latter akin to 
the origin of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) from a sarbecovirus infecting bats. Analysis of the 
range of pathogenicities and epidemiologies of these coronaviruses 
may potentially offer insights and predictions about the longer-term 
patterns of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
The four human seasonal coronaviruses (HCoV-NL63, HCoV-229E, 
HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1) are distributed worldwide, causing 
generally mild self-limiting respiratory infections and rounds of 
reinfection. Although now established in humans, homologues 
of each of these viruses are widely distributed in other mammals, 
potentially representing their zoonotic origins. These include viruses 
in cows (HCoV-OC43) and camelids (HCoV-229E), and a wider 
reservoir of related but more genetically diverse homologues infecting 
various species of bats or rodents (HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1)208,209.
Among more recently emerging coronaviruses in humans, 
the highly pathogenic SARS-CoV is genetically closest to 
sarbecoviruses infecting bats and various intermediate species 
such as civets. MERS-CoV, also a betacoronavirus, has transmitted 
multiple times into humans on contact with camels in the Middle 
East. These two coronaviruses appear to contrast markedly to the 
human seasonal coronaviruses with respect to infection outcomes 
and epidemiology. At one extreme, SARS-CoV showed rapid 
spread shortly after its emergence in 2003, but control measures 
effectively disrupted its sustained chains of transmissions and it 
was rapidly eradicated210. Infections of MERS-CoV are restricted 
in their ability for human-to-human transmission and are present 
primarily through repeated spillovers from camels or following 
exposures of medics to patients who are infected124. By contrast, 
human seasonal coronaviruses are efficiently transmitted by 
respiratory routes, such that there is likely universal exposure and 
cycles of infection and reinfection throughout childhood and in 
adults211,212. The scope of these outcomes along with understanding 
the modulating effect of longer-term adaptive changes in a new 
human host may provide insights into the future stages of the 
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
Dating a phylogenetically inferred split of the HCoV-OC43 lineage 
from the closely related bovine coronavirus (BCoV) close to the time 
of a historic severe pandemic of transmissible respiratory disease in 
1891 (ref. 213) has led to interpretations of the low pathogenicity of 
present-day strains of HCoV-OC43 as a manifestation of a directional 
evolution of coronaviruses towards reduced pathogenicity following 
zoonotic introduction. Despite appealing to common sense, such 
assertions have been largely speculative, based on few data and 
not backed by any direct evidence. Furthermore, analyses of 
complete genomes point to a time to the most recent ancestor that is 
inconsistent with the 1891 outbreak214.
Much of the adaptive evolution of SARS-CoV-2 has centred 
around interaction between the viral spike glycoprotein and the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) cellular receptor, with many 
mutations in variants of concern (VOCs) causing increased binding 
or cleavage that correlate with enhanced transmissibility (see main 
text). Comparisons of SARS-CoV-2 spike gene sequences with those 
of the closest bat-derived sarbecoviruses (for example, RaTG13) 
have revealed multiple insertion or deletion events215, such as the 
acquisition of a polybasic furin cleavage site between the S1 (receptor 
binding) and S2 (membrane fusion domain) of SARS-CoV-2 (ref. 216) 
that mediates post-binding cleavage. Differences between bat and 
human ACE2 receptors have similarly necessitated substantial further 
changes in the receptor binding domains (RBDs) of the spike protein 
of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 from their bat ancestors to enable 
entry into human cells217,218. Deletions in the SARS-CoV and SARS-
CoV-2 Nsp3 and ORF8 accessory genes219 may modify interactions 
with host–cell defence pathways, perhaps analogous to the attrition 
of the ORF8 gene of HCoV-229E and HCoV-NL63 compared with their 
presumed immediate zoonotic ancestors.
In theory, many possible parallels could be drawn between the 
emergence of SARS-CoV-2 and what has been reconstructed for 
the emergence of other coronaviruses in humans. These include 
widespread and diverse bat reservoirs of homologues of human 
coronaviruses; the frequent existence of intermediate mammalian 
hosts that may pre-adapt coronaviruses for human infection; and 
evidence for rapid adaptive changes or reorganization in proteins 
used for cell entry and host–cell interactions post emergence. 
However, very few aspects of these potential parallels are 
underpinned by reliable scientific data, which means extrapolations 
from our knowledge about other human coronaviruses should 
be cautious and that studying the evolution SARS-CoV-2 itself 
may be far more informative.
The four seasonal coronaviruses have relatively low pathogenicity in 
individuals who are immune competent, with SARS-CoV and MERS at 
the other extreme. It is unclear how virulent the seasonal coronaviruses 
were when they first emerged in humans, and the degree to which 
their current pathogenicity is determined by viral evolution and/or 
population immunity. Critically disentangling these processes 
from each other could offer insight into the future pathogenicity 
of SARS-CoV-2.


--- Page 16 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
376
Review article
Other potential rare high-impact evolutionary events that could 
occur in the future could radically change the picture, but their like-
lihood is unquantifiable. These include, for example, recombina-
tion between SARS-CoV-2 and another virus, drastically altering the 
pheno­type; spillback of divergent variants from animal reservoirs into 
humans; a complete change in the mode of transmission, akin to the 
one observed in the transmissible gastroenteritis virus, a coronavirus 
of animals180; and novel forms of vaccine escape that rapidly erode 
protection against severe disease and death.
In order to map out the repercussions of SARS-CoV-2 evolution for 
human health, we need to consider the intersection between its epi-
demiology and evolution. In the absence of eradication, the virus will 
likely become endemic, a process that could take years to decades178. 
We will be able to establish that endemic persistence has been reached 
if the virus shows repeatable patterns in prevalence year on year, for 
example, regular seasonal fluctuations and no out-of-season peaks. The 
form this endemic persistence will take remains to be determined181, 
and the eventual infection prevalence and disease burden will depend 
on the rate of emergence of antigenically distinct lineages, our ability 
to roll out and update vaccines, and the future trajectory of virulence 
(Fig. 4c). The tractability of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in the future will 
to a significant extent depend on the intensity of further evolutionary 
change, which in turn will depend on its global infection prevalence.
We have learned a great deal by studying the evolution of SARS-
CoV-2 since its emergence in humans, and we can certainly make well-
educated guesses about what is likely or unlikely to happen next, but the 
highly multifactorial and stochastic nature of the process will always 
keep the future evolutionary trajectory of the virus essentially unknown 
in many of its crucial details. Meanwhile, focusing on the epidemiol-
ogy of the pathogen, it is important to bear in mind that the transition 
from a pandemic to future endemic existence of SARS-CoV-2 is likely 
to be long and erratic, rather than a short and distinct switch, and that 
endemic SARS-CoV-2 is by far not a synonym for safe infections, mild 
COVID-19 or a low population mortality and morbidity burden.
Published online: 5 April 2023
References
1.	
Khare, S. et al. GISAID’s role in pandemic response. China CDC Wkly 3, 1049–1051 (2021).
2.	
Pybus, O. G. & Rambaut, A. Evolutionary analysis of the dynamics of viral infectious 
disease. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10, 540–550 (2009).
3.	
Volz, E. et al. Evaluating the effects of SARS-CoV-2 spike mutation D614G on 
transmissibility and pathogenicity. Cell 184, 64–75.e11 (2021).
4.	
Clarke, D. K. et al. Genetic bottlenecks and population passages cause profound fitness 
differences in RNA viruses. J. Virol. 67, 222–228 (1993).
5.	
Sanjuán, R., Nebot, M. R., Chirico, N., Mansky, L. M. & Belshaw, R. Viral mutation rates. 
J. Virol. 84, 9733–9748 (2010).
6.	
Sanjuán, R. & Domingo-Calap, P. Mechanisms of viral mutation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73, 
4433–4448 (2016).
7.	
Loewe, L. & Hill, W. L. The population genetics of mutations: good, bad and indifferent. 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 365, 1153–1167 (2010).
8.	
Fehr, A. R. & Perlman, S. Coronaviruses: an overview of their replication and 
pathogenesis. Methods Mol. Biol. 1282, 1–23 (2015).
9.	
Amicone, M. et al. Mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 and emergence of mutators during 
experimental evolution. Evol. Med. Public Health 10, 142–155 (2022).
10.	
Minskaia, E., Hertzig, T., Gorbalenya, A. E. & Ziebuhr, J. Discovery of an RNA virus 3′→5′ 
exoribonuclease that is critically involved in coronavirus RNA synthesis. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 103, 5108–5113 (2006).
11.	
Ribeiro, R. M. et al. Quantifying the diversification of hepatitis C virus (HCV) during 
primary infection: estimates of the in vivo mutation rate. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002880 
(2012).
12.	
Rawson, J. M. O., Landman, S. R., Reilly, C. S. & Mansky, L. M. HIV-1 and HIV-2 exhibit 
similar mutation frequencies and spectra in the absence of G-to-A hypermutation. 
Retrovirology 12, 60 (2015).
13.	
Meng, B. et al. Recurrent emergence of SARS-CoV-2 spike deletion H69/V70 and its role 
in the Alpha variant B.1.1.7. Cell Rep. 35, 109292 (2021).
14.	
Malim, M. H. APOBEC proteins and intrinsic resistance to HIV-1 infection. Philos. Trans. 
R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 364, 675–687 (2009).
15.	
Jarmuz, A. et al. An anthropoid-specific locus of orphan C to U RNA-editing enzymes 
on chromosome 22. Genomics 79, 285–296 (2002).
16.	
Rogozin, I. B., Basu, M. K., Jordan, I. K., Pavlov, Y. I. & Koonin, E. V. APOBEC4, a new 
member of the AID/APOBEC family of polynucleotide (deoxy)cytidine deaminases 
predicted by computational analysis. Cell Cycle 4, 1281–1285 (2005).
17.	
Simmonds, P. & Ansari, M. A. Extensive C→U transition biases in the genomes of a wide 
range of mammalian RNA viruses; potential associations with transcriptional mutations, 
damage- or host-mediated editing of viral RNA. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009596 (2021).
18.	
Klimczak, L. J., Randall, T. A., Saini, N., Li, J.-L. & Gordenin, D. A. Similarity between 
mutation spectra in hypermutated genomes of rubella virus and in SARS-CoV-2 genomes 
accumulated during the COVID-19 pandemic. PLoS ONE 15, e0237689 (2020).
19.	
Kim, K. et al. The roles of APOBEC-mediated RNA editing in SARS-CoV-2 mutations, 
replication and fitness. Sci. Rep. 12, 14972 (2022).
20.	 Simmonds, P. Rampant C→U hypermutation in the genomes of SARS-CoV-2 and other 
coronaviruses: causes and consequences for their short- and long-term evolutionary 
trajectories. mSphere 5, e00408–e00420 (2020).
21.	
Di Giorgio, S., Martignano, F., Torcia, M. G., Mattiuz, G. & Conticello, S. G. Evidence for 
host-dependent RNA editing in the transcriptome of SARS-CoV-2. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb5813 
(2020).
22.	 Ringlander, J., Fingal, J., Kann, H. & Kann, M. Impact of ADAR-induced editing of minor 
viral RNA populations on replication and transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 119, e2112663119 (2022).
23.	 van Dorp, L. et al. Emergence of genomic diversity and recurrent mutations in SARS-CoV-2. 
Infect. Genet. Evol. 83, 104351 (2020).
24.	 van Dorp, L. et al. No evidence for increased transmissibility from recurrent mutations 
in SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Commun. 11, 5986 (2020).
25.	 Belshaw, R., Sanjuán, R. & Pybus, O. G. Viral mutation and substitution: units and levels. 
Curr. Opin. Virol. 1, 430–435 (2011).
26.	 Rambaout, A. Estimating the rate of molecular evolution: incorporating non-
contemporaneous sequences into maximum likelihood phylogenies. Bioinformatics 16, 
395–399 (2000).
27.	
Drummond, A. Nicholls, G. K., Rodrigo, A. G. & Solomon, W. in Tools for Constructing 
Chronologies: Crossing Disciplinary Boundaries Vol. 177 (eds Buck, C.E. & Maillard, A.R.) 
149–171 (Springer-Verlag, 2004).
28.	 Duchene, S. et al. Temporal signal and the phylodynamic threshold of SARS-CoV-2. 
Virus Evol. 6, veaa061 (2020).
29.	 Ghafari, M. et al. Purifying selection determines the short-term time dependency of 
evolutionary rates in SARS-CoV-2 and pH1N1 influenza. Mol. Biol. Evol. 39, msac009 
(2022).
30.	 Jackson, B. et al. Generation and transmission of interlineage recombinants in the 
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Cell 184, 5179–5188 (2021).
31.	
Boni, M. F. et al. Evolutionary origins of the SARS-CoV-2 sarbecovirus lineage responsible 
for the COVID-19 pandemic. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 1408–1417 (2020).
32.	 Lai, M. M. & Cavanagh, D. The molecular biology of corona viruses. Adv. Virus Res. 48, 
1–100 (1997).
33.	 Rambaut, A. et al. Preliminary genomic characterisation of an emergent SARS-CoV-2 
lineage in the UK defined by a novel set of spike mutations. Virological https://virological.
org/t/preliminary-genomic-characterisation-of-an-emergent-sars-cov-2-lineage-in-the-
uk-defined-by-a-novel-set-of-spike-mutations/563/1 (2020).
34.	 O’Toole, Á. et al. Tracking the international spread of SARS-CoV-2 lineages B.1.1.7 and 
B.1.351/501Y-V2 with Grinch. Wellcome Open Res. 6, 121 (2021).
35.	 Sekizuka, T. et al. Genome recombination between the Delta and Alpha variants of severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Jpn J. Infect. Dis. 75, 415–418 
(2022).
36.	 UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern and variants under 
investigation in England — Technical Briefing 39. GOV.UK https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1063424/
Tech-Briefing-39-25March2022_FINAL.pdf (2022).
37.	
UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). SARS-CoV-2 variants of public health interest: 28 
October 2022. GOV.UK https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sars-cov-2-variants-
of-public-health-interest/sars-cov-2-variants-of-public-health-interest-28-october-2022 
(2022).
38.	 Rhee, C., Kanjilal, S., Baker, M. & Klompas, M. Duration of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infectivity: when is it safe to discontinue isolation? 
Clin. Infect. Dis. 72, 1467–1474 (2021).
39.	 Bullard, J. et al. Predicting infectious severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
from diagnostic samples. Clin. Infect. Dis. 71, 2663–2666 (2020).
40.	 Wölfel, R. et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature 
581, 465–469 (2020).
41.	
Kissler, S. M. et al. Viral dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 variants in vaccinated and unvaccinated 
persons. N. Engl. J. Med. 385, 2489–2491 (2021).
42.	 Sun, K. et al. SARS-CoV-2 transmission, persistence of immunity, and estimates of 
Omicron’s impact in South African population cohorts. Sci. Transl Med. 14, eabo7081 
(2022).
43.	 Cevik, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV viral load dynamics, duration 
of viral shedding, and infectiousness: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet Microbe 2, e13–e22 (2021).


--- Page 17 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
377
Review article
44.	 Hakki, S. et al. Onset and window of SARS-CoV-2 infectiousness and temporal 
correlation with symptom onset: a prospective, longitudinal, community cohort study. 
Lancet Respir. Med. 10, 1061–1073 (2022).
45.	 Lythgoe, K. A. et al. SARS-CoV-2 within-host diversity and transmission. Science 372, 
eabg0821 (2021).
46.	 Ke, R. et al. Daily longitudinal sampling of SARS-CoV-2 infection reveals substantial 
heterogeneity in infectiousness. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 640–652 (2022).
47.	
Farjo, M. et al. Within-host evolutionary dynamics and tissue compartmentalization 
during acute SARS-CoV-2 infection. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2022.06.21.497047 (2022).
48.	 Martin, M. A. & Koelle, K. Comment on ‘Genomic epidemiology of superspreading events 
in Austria reveals mutational dynamics and transmission properties of SARS-CoV-2’. 
Sci. Transl Med. 13, eabh1803 (2021).
49.	 Koelle, K. et al. Masks do not more than prevent transmission: theory and data undermine 
the variolation hypothesis. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.28.22277028 
(2022).
50.	 Lumby, C. K., Nene, N. R. & Illingworth, C. J. R. A novel framework for inferring parameters 
on transmission from viral sequence data. PLoS Genet. 14, e1007718 (2018).
51.	
Zwart, M. P. & Elena, S. F. Matters of size: genetic bottlenecks in virus infection and their 
potential impact on evolution. Annu. Rev. Virol. 2, 161–179 (2015).
52.	 McCrone, J. T. et al. Stochastic processes constrain the within and between host 
evolution of influenza virus. eLife 7, 35962 (2018).
53.	 Sobel Leonard, A., Weissman, D. B., Greenbaum, B., Ghedin, E. & Koelle, K. Transmission 
bottleneck size estimation from pathogen deep-sequencing data, with an application 
to human influenza A virus. J. Virol. 91, 00171-17 (2017).
54.	 Ghafari, M., Lumpy, C. K., Weissman, D. B. & Illingworth, C. J. R. Inferring transmission 
bottleneck size from viral sequence data using a novel haplotype reconstruction 
method. J. Virol. 94, e00014–e00020 (2020).
55.	 Joseph, S. B., Swanstrom, R., Kashuba, A. D. M. & Cohen, M. S. Bottlenecks in HIV-1 
transmission: insights from the study of founder viruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13, 414–425 
(2015).
56.	 Gutiérrez, S., Michalakis, Y. & Blanc, S. Virus population bottlenecks during within-host 
progression and host-to-host transmission. Curr. Opin. Virol. 2, 546–555 (2012).
57.	
Adam, D. C. et al. Clustering and superspreading potential of SARS-CoV-2 infections 
in Hong Kong. Nat. Med. 26, 1714–1719 (2020).
58.	 Liu, Y., Eggo, R. M. & Kucharski, A. J. Secondary attack rate and superspreading events 
for SARS-CoV-2. Lancet 395, e47 (2020).
59.	 Wright, S. Evolution in Mendelian populations. Genetics 16, 97–159 (1931).
60.	 Grubaugh, N. D., Hanage, W. P. & Rasmussen, A. L. Making sense of mutation: what 
D614G means for the COVID-19 pandemic remains unclear. Cell 182, 794–795 (2020).
61.	
Korber, B. et al. Tracking changes in SARS-CoV-2 spike: evidence that D614G increases 
infectivity of the COVID-19 virus. Cell 182, 812–827.e19 (2020).
62.	 Hou, Y. J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 D614G variant exhibits efficient replication ex vivo and 
transmission in vivo. Science 370, 1464–1468 (2020).
63.	 Meyer, A. G., Spielman, S. J., Bedford, T. & Wilke, C. O. Time dependence of evolutionary 
metrics during the 2009 pandemic influenza virus outbreak. Virus Evol. 1, vev006  
(2015).
64.	 Holmes, E. C., Dudas, G., Rambaut, A. & Andersen, K. G. The evolution of Ebola virus: 
insights from the 2013–2016 epidemic. Nature 538, 193–200 (2016).
65.	 Viana, R. et al. Rapid epidemic expansion of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant in southern 
Africa. Nature 603, 679–686 (2022).
66.	 Lythgoe, K. A. et al. Lineage replacement and evolution captured by the United Kingdom 
Covid Infection Survey. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.05.21268323 
(2022).
67.	
Tay, J. H., Porter, A. F., Wirth, W. & Duchene, S. The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants 
of concern is driven by acceleration of the substitution rate. Mol. Biol. Evol. 39, msac013 
(2022).
68.	 Gräf, T. et al. Identification of a novel SARS-CoV-2 P.1 sub-lineage in Brazil provides 
new insights about the mechanisms of emergence of variants of concern. Virus Evol. 7, 
veab091 (2021).
69.	 Neher, R. A. Contributions of adaptation and purifying selection of SARS-CoV-2 
evolution. Virus Evol. 8, veac113 (2022).
70.	 Saito, A. et al. Virological characteristics of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron BA.2.75 variant. 
Cell Host Microbe 30, 1540–1555 (2022).
71.	
Ito, J. et al. Convergent evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron subvariants leading to the 
emergence of BQ.1.1 variant. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.05.519085 
(2022).
72.	 Sousa, W. P. & Grosholz, E. D. in Habitat Structure Vol. 8 (eds Bell, S. S., McCoy, E. D.  
& Mushinsky, H. R.) 300–324 (Springer, 1991).
73.	 Hilleman, M. R. Strategies and mechanisms for host and pathogen survival in acute 
and persistent viral infections. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 14560–14566 (2004).
74.	 Domingo, E. in Virus as Populations Ch. 5 (ed. Domingo, E.) 167–194 (Academic, 2020).
75.	 Shang, J. et al. Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2. Nature 581, 
221–224 (2020).
76.	 Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is 
blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell 181, 271–280 (2020).
77.	
Sinha, S., Tam, B. & Ming Wang, S. RBD double mutations of SARS-CoV-2 strains increase 
transmissibility through enhanced interaction between RBD and ACE2 receptor. Viruses 
14, 1 (2022).
78.	 Yurkovetskiy, L. et al. Structural and functional analysis of the D614G SARS-CoV-2 spike 
protein variant. Cell 183, 739–751 (2020).
79.	 Ozono, S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 D614G spike mutation increases entry efficiency with 
enhanced ACE2-binding affinity. Nat. Commun. 12, 848 (2021).
80.	 Liu, H. et al. The basis of a more contagious 501Y.V1 variant of SARS-CoV-2. Cell Res. 31, 
720–722 (2021).
81.	
Benton, D. J. et al. Receptor binding and priming of the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 
for membrane fusion. Nature 588, 327–330 (2020).
82.	 Peacock, T. P. et al. The furin cleavage site in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein is required 
for transmission in ferrets. Nat. Microbiol. 6, 899–909 (2021).
83.	 Wrobel, A. G. et al. Evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in the human host. 
Nat. Commun. 13, 1178 (2022).
84.	 Johnson, B. A. et al. Nucleocapsid mutations in SARS-CoV-2 augment replication and 
pathogenesis. PLoS Pathog. 18, e1010627 (2022).
85.	 Thorne, L. G. et al. Evolution of enhanced innate immune evasion by SARS-CoV-2. Nature 
602, 487–495 (2022).
86.	 Lamers, M. M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Omicron efficiently infects human airway, but not 
alveolar epithelium. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.19.476898 (2022).
87.	
Hui, K. P. Y. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant replication in human bronchus and lung 
ex vivo. Nature 603, 715–720 (2022).
88.	 Port, J. et al. Increased small particle aerosol transmission of B.1.1.7 compared with 
SARS-CoV-2 lineage A in vivo. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 213–223 (2022).
89.	 Bushmaker, T. et al. Comparative aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 variants 
of concern. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.11.21.517352 (2022).
90.	 Oswin, H. P., Haddrell, A. E., Otern-Fernandez, M. & Reid, J. P. The dynamics of SARS-
CoV-2 infectivity with changes in aerosol microenvironment. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
119, e2200109119 (2022).
91.	
King, A. A., Schresta, S., Harvill, E. T. & Bjornstad, O. N. Evolution of acute infections and 
the invasion‐persistence trade‐off. Am. Nat. 173, 446–455 (2009).
92.	 Lehtinen, S., Ashcroft, P. & Bonhoeffer, S. On the relationship between serial interval, 
infectiousness profile and generation time. J. R. Soc. Interface 18, 20200756 (2021).
93.	 Wallinga, J. & Lipsitch, M. How generation intervals shape the relationship between 
growth rates and reproductive numbers. Proc. Biol. Sci. 274, 599–604 (2007).
94.	 Backer, J. A. et al. Shorter serial intervals in SARS-CoV-2 cases with Omicron BA.1 variant 
compared with Delta variant, the Netherlands, 13 to 26 December 2021. Eur. Surveill. 27, 
2200042 (2022).
95.	 Hay, J. A. et al. Quantifying the impact of immune history and variant on SARS-CoV-2 viral 
kinetics and1 infection rebound: a retrospective cohort study. eLife 11, e81849 (2022).
96.	 Pulliam, J. R. et al. Increased risk of SARS-CoV-2 reinfection associated with emergence 
of Omicron in South Africa. Science 376, 596 (2022).
97.	
Harvey, W. T. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variants, spike mutations and immune escape. Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 19, 409–424 (2021).
98.	 Starr, T. N. et al. Deep mutational scanning of SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain 
reveals constraints on folding and ACE2 binding. Cell 182, 1295–1310.e20 (2020).
99.	 Greaney, A. J. et al. Complete mapping of mutations to the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-
binding domain that escape antibody recognition. Cell Host Microbe 29, 44–57.e9  
(2021).
100.	 Dejnirattisai, W. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Omicron-B.1.1.529 leads to widespread escape from 
neutralizing antibody responses. Cell 185, 467–484.e15 (2022).
101.	 McCallum, M. et al. Structural basis of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron immune evasion and 
receptor engagement. Science 375, 864–868 (2022).
102.	 Nutalai, R. et al. Potent cross-reactive antibodies following Omicron breakthrough 
in vaccinees. Cell 185, 2116–2131.e18 (2022).
103.	 Tuekprakhon, A. et al. Antibody escape of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron BA.4 and BA.5 from 
vaccine and BA.1 serum. Cell 185, 2422–2433.e13 (2022).
104.	 Kistler, K. E., Huddleston, J. & Bedford, T. Rapid and parallel adaptive mutations in spike 
S1 drive clade success in SARS-CoV-2. Cell Host Microbe 30, 545–555.e4 (2022).
105.	 Obermeyer, F. et al. Analysis of 6.4 million SARS-CoV-2 genomes identifies mutations 
associated with fitness. Science 376, 1327–1332 (2022).
106.	 Naranbhai, V. et al. T cell reactivity to the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant is preserved 
in most but not all individuals. Cell 185, 1041–1051 (2022).
107.	 Yu, F., Tai, W. & Cheng, G. T-cell immunity: a barrier to Omicron immune evasion. 
Sig. Transduct. Target. Ther. 7, 297 (2022).
108.	 Riu, C. et al. Escape from recognition of SARS-CoV-2 variant spike epitopes but overall 
preservation of T cell immunity. Sci. Transl Med. 14, eabj6824 (2022).
109.	 Dolton, G. et al. Emergence of immune escape at dominant SARS-CoV-2 killer T cell 
epitope. Cell 185, 2936–2951 (2022).
110.	 Agerer, B. et al. SARS-CoV-2 mutations in MHC-I-restricted epitopes evade CD8+ T cell 
responses. Sci. Immunol. 6, eabg646 (2021).
111.	 Chang, M. R. et al. Analysis of a SARS-CoV-2 convalescent cohort identified a common 
strategy for escape of vaccine-induced anti-RBD antibodies by Beta and Omicron 
variants. eBioMedicine 80, 104025 (2022).
112.	 Tada, T. et al. Partial resistance of SARS-CoV-2 Delta variants to vaccine-elicited 
antibodies and convalescent sera. iScience 24, 103341 (2021).
113.	 Reed, A. F. The evolution of virulence. Trends Microbiol. 2, 73–76 (1994).
114.	 Tegally, H. et al. Detection of a SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern in South Africa. Nature 
592, 438–443 (2021).
115.	 Funk, T. et al. Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern B.1.1.7, B.1.351 or P.1: data 
from seven EU/EEA countries, weeks 38/2020 to 10/2021. Eur. Surveill. 26, 2100348 (2021).


--- Page 18 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
378
Review article
116.	 Public Health England. SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern and variants under investigation 
in England Technical briefing 16 2021. GOV.UK https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/997414/Variants_of_
Concern_VOC_Technical_Briefing_16.pdf (2021).
117.	 European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Assessment of the further spread 
and potential impact of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant of concern in the EU/EEA, 19th 
update. ECDC https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/covid-19-omicron-risk-
assessment-further-emergence-and-potential-impact (2022).
118.	 Barut, G. T. et al. The spike gene is a major determinant for the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron-BA.1 
phenotype. Nat. Commun. 13, 5929 (2022).
119.	 Chen, D.-Y. et al. Spike and nsp6 are key determinants of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron BA.1 
attenuation. Nature 615, 143–150 (2023).
120.	 Liu, S., Selvaraj, P., Sangare, K., Luan, B. & Wang, T. T. Spike protein-independent 
attenuation of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant in laboratory mice. Cell Rep. 40, 111359 (2022).
121.	 Markov, P. V., Katzourakis, A. & Stilianakis, N. I. Antigenic evolution will lead to new 
SARS-CoV-2 variants with unpredictable severity. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 20, 251–252  
(2022).
122.	 Elsworth, P. et al. Increased virulence of rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus associated 
with genetic resistance in wild Australian rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus). Virology 
464–465, 415–423 (2014).
123.	 Lange, M. & Thulke, H.-H. Elucidating transmission parameters of African swine fever 
through wild boar carcasses by combining spatio-temporal notification data and 
agent-based modelling. Stoch. Environ. Res. Risk Assess. 31, 379–391 (2017).
124.	 World Health Organization (WHO). WHO Middle East respiratory syndrome: global 
summary and assessment of risk — 16 November 2022. WHO https://www.who.int/
publications/i/item/WHO-MERS-RA-2022.1 (2022).
125.	 COVID-19 excess mortality collaborators. Estimating excess mortality due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic analysis of COVID-19-related mortality, 2020–21. 
Lancet 399, 1513–1536 (2022).
126.	 Davies, N. G. et al. Estimated transmissibility and impact of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 
in England. Science 372, eabg3055 (2021).
127.	 Shen, X. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7 is susceptible to neutralizing antibodies elicited 
by ancestral spike vaccines. Cell Host Microbe 29, 529–539.e3 (2021).
128.	 Rambaut, A. et al. A dynamic nomenclature proposal for SARS-CoV-2 lineages to assist 
genomic epidemiology. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 1403–1407 (2020).
129.	 Konings, F. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variants of interest and concern naming scheme conducive 
for global discourse. Nat. Microbiol. 6, 821–823 (2021).
130.	 Faria, N. R. et al. Genomics and epidemiology of the P.1 SARS-CoV-2 lineage in Manaus, 
Brazil. Science 372, 815–821 (2021).
131.	 Zhou, D. et al. Evidence of escape of SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.351 from natural and 
vaccine-induced sera. Cell 184, 2348–2361.e6 (2021).
132.	 Sabino, E. C. et al. Resurgence of COVID-19 in Manaus, Brazil, despite high 
seroprevalence. Lancet 397, 452–455 (2021).
133.	 Dhar, M. S. et al. Genomic characterization and epidemiology of an emerging 
SARS-CoV-2 variant in Delhi, India. Science 374, 995–999 (2021).
134.	 Bolze, A. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variant Delta rapidly displaced variant Alpha in the United 
States and led to higher viral loads. Cell Rep. Med. 3, 100564 (2022).
135.	 Campbell, F. et al. Increased transmissibility and global spread of SARS-CoV-2 variants 
of concern as at June 2021. Eur. Surveill. 26, 2100509 (2021).
136.	 Tegally, H. et al. Emergence of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron lineages BA.4 and BA.5 in South 
Africa. Nat. Med. 28, 1785–1790 (2022).
137.	 Attwood, S. W., Hill, S. C., Aanensen, D. M., Connor, T. R. & Pybus, O. G. Phylogenetic 
and phylodynamic approaches to understanding and combating the early SARS-CoV-2 
pandemic. Nat. Rev. Genet. 23, 547–562 (2022).
138.	 Tao, K. et al. The biological and clinical significance of emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants. 
Nat. Rev. Genet. 22, 757–773 (2021).
139.	 Hill, V. et al. The origins and molecular evolution of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 in the UK. 
Virus Evol. 8, veac080 (2022).
140.	 McCrone, J. T. et al. Context-specific emergence and growth of the SARS-CoV-2 Delta 
variant. Nature 610, 154–160 (2022).
141.	 Adepoju, P. Challenges of SARS-CoV-2 genomic surveillance in Africa. Lancet Microbe 2, 
e139 (2021).
142.	 Wilkinson, E. et al. A year of genomic surveillance reveals how the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic 
unfolded in Africa. Science 374, 423–431 (2021).
143.	 Mandolo, J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 exposure in Malawian blood donors: an analysis of 
seroprevalence and variant dynamics between January 2020 and July 2021. BMC Med. 
19, 303 (2021).
144.	 Ghafari, M., Watson, O. J., Karlinsky, A., Ferretti, L. & Katzourakis, A. A framework 
for reconstructing SARS-CoV-2 transmission dynamics using excess mortality data. 
Nat. Commun. 13, 3015 (2022).
145.	 Ghafari, M., Liu, Q., Dhillon, A., Katzourakis, A. & Weissman, D. B. Investigating the 
evolutionary origins of the first three SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. Front. Virol. 2, 
942555 (2022).
146.	 Schlottau, K. et al. SARS-CoV-2 in fruit bats, ferrets, pigs, and chickens: an experimental 
transmission study. Lancet Microbe 1, e218–e225 (2020).
147.	 Muñoz-Fontela, C. et al. Advances and gaps in SARS-CoV-2 infection models. PLoS Pathog. 
18, e1010161 (2022).
148.	 Oude Munnink, B. B. et al. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 on mink farms between humans 
and mink and back to humans. Science 371, 172–177 (2021).
149.	 Hale, V. L. et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection in free-ranging white-tailed deer. Nature 602, 
481–486 (2022).
150.	 Ren, W. et al. Mutation Y453F in the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 enhances interaction 
with the mink ACE2 receptor for host adaption. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1010053 (2021).
151.	 Pickering, B. et al. Divergent SARS-CoV-2 variant emerges in white-tailed deer with 
deer-to-human transmission. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 2011–2024 (2022).
152.	 Porter, A. F., Purcell, D. F. J., Howden, B. P. & Duchene, S. Evolutionary rate of SARS-CoV-2 
increases during zoonotic infection of farmed mink. Virus Evol. 9, vead002 (2023).
153.	 Diamond, M. et al. The SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.529 Omicron virus causes attenuated infection 
and disease in mice and hamsters. Preprint at Res. Sq. https://doi.org/10.21203/
rs.3.rs-1211792/v1 (2021).
154.	 Shuai, H. et al. Attenuated replication and pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.529 
Omicron. Nature 603, 693–699 (2022).
155.	 Dinnon, K. H. III et al. A mouse-adapted model of SARS-CoV-2 to test COVID-19 
countermeasures. Nature 586, 560–566 (2020).
156.	 Weigang, S. et al. Within-host evolution of SARS-CoV-2 in an immunosuppressed 
COVID-19 patient as a source of immune escape variants. Nat. Commun. 12, 6405  
(2021).
157.	 Choi, B., Choudhary, M. C., Regan, J., Sparks, J. A. & Padera, R. F. Persistence and 
evolution of SARS-CoV-2 in an immunocompromised host. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 
2291–2293 (2020).
158.	 Clark, S. A. et al. SARS-CoV-2 evolution in an immunocompromised host reveals shared 
neutralization escape mechanisms. Cell 184, 2605–2617.e18 (2021).
159.	 Msomi, N., Lessells, R., Mlisana, K. & de Oliveira, T. Africa: tackle HIV and COVID-19 
together. Nature 600, 33–36 (2021).
160.	 Wilkinson, S. A. J. et al. Recurrent SARS-CoV-2 mutations in immunodeficient patients. 
Virus Evol. 8, veac050 (2022).
161.	 Gregory, D. A. et al. Genetic diversity and evolutionary convergence of cryptic 
SARS- CoV-2 lineages detected via wastewater sequencing. PLoS Pathog. 18, e1010636  
(2022).
162.	 Gonzalez-Reiche, A. S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variants in the making: sequential intrahost 
evolution and forward transmissions in the context of persistent infections. Preprint at 
bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.05.25.22275533 (2022).
163.	 Harari, S. et al. Drivers of adaptive evolution during chronic SARS-CoV-2 infections. 
Nat. Med. 28, 1501–1508 (2022).
164.	 Moran, E. et al. Persistent SARS-CoV-2 infection: the urgent need for access to treatment 
and trials. Lancet Infect. Dis. 21, 1345–1347 (2021).
165.	 Dennehy, J. J., Gupta, R. K., Hanage, W. P., Johnson, M. C. & Peacock, T. P. Where is the 
next SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern? Lancet 399, 1938–1939 (2022).
166.	 Lemieux, J. E. & Luban, J. Consulting the Oracle of SARS-CoV-2 infection. J. Infec. Dis. 
225, 1115–1117 (2022).
167.	 Oude Munnink, B. B. et al. The next phase of SARS-CoV-2 surveillance: real-time 
molecular epidemiology. Nat. Med. 27, 1518–1524 (2021).
168.	 Maher, M. C. et al. Predicting the mutational drivers of future SARS-CoV-2 variants of 
concern. Sci. Transl Med. 14, eabk3445 (2022).
169.	 Subissi, L. et al. An early warning system for emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants. Nat. Med. 
28, 1110–1115 (2022).
170.	 Telenti, A., Hodcroft, E. B. & Robertson, D. L. The evolution and biology of SARS-CoV-2 
variants. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 12, a041390 (2022).
171.	 Amman, F. et al. Viral variant-resolved wastewater surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 at national 
scale. Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 1814–1822 (2022).
172.	 Karthikeyan, S. et al. Wastewater sequencing reveals early cryptic SARS-CoV-2 variant 
transmission. Nature 609, 101–108 (2022).
173.	 Gao, Y. et al. Ancestral SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells cross-recognize the Omicron variant. 
Nat. Med. 28, 472–476 (2022).
174.	 Keeton, R. et al. T cell responses to SARS-CoV-2 spike cross-recognize Omicron. Nature 
603, 488–492 (2022).
175.	 Kitchin, D. et al. Ad26.COV2.S breakthrough infections induce high titers of neutralizing 
antibodies against Omicron and other SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. Cell Rep. Med. 3, 
100535 (2022).
176.	 He, W.-T. et al. Targeted isolation of diverse human protective broadly neutralizing 
antibodies against SARS-like viruses. Nat. Immunol. 23, 960–970 (2022).
177.	 Al-Aly, Z., Bowe, B. & Xie, Y. Long COVID after breakthrough SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
Nat. Med. 28, 1461–1467 (2022).
178.	 Lavine, J. S., Bjornstad, O. N. & Antia, R. Immunological characteristics govern the 
transition of COVID-19 to endemicity. Science 371, 741–745 (2021).
179.	 Calaway, E. Heavily mutated Omictorn varaints puts scientists into alert. Nature 600, 
21 (2021).
180.	 Pensaert, M., Callebaut, P. & Vergote, J. Isolation of a porcine respiratory, non-enteric 
coronavirus related to transmissible gastroenteritis. Vet. Q. 8, 257–261 (1986).
181.	 Katzourakis, A. COVID-19: endemic doesn’t mean harmless. Nature 601, 485 (2022).
182.	 Hadfield, J. et al. Nextstrain: real-time tracking of pathogen evolution. Bioinformatics 34, 
4121–4123 (2018).
183.	 Stilianakis, N. I., Perelson, A. S. & Hayden, F. G. Emergence of drug resistance during 
an influenza epidemic: insights from a mathematical model. J. Infect. Dis. 177, 863–873 
(1998).
184.	 Clavel, F. & Hance, A. J. HIV drug resistance. N. Engl. J. Med. 350, 1023–1035 (2004).
185.	 Holmes, E. C. et al. Understanding the impact of resistance to influenza antivirals. 
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 34, e00224-20 (2021).


--- Page 19 ---
Nature Reviews Microbiology | Volume 21 | June 2023 | 361–379
379
Review article
186.	 Artese, A. et al. Current status of antivirals and druggable targets of SARS CoV-2 and 
other human pathogenic coronaviruses. Drug Resist. Updat. 53, 100721 (2020).
187.	 Hussain, M., Galvin, H. D., Haw, T. Y., Nutsford, A. N. & Husain, M. Drug resistance in 
influenza A virus: the epidemiology and management. Infect. Drug Resist. 10, 121–134 
(2017).
188.	 Perelson, A. S., Rong, L. & Hayden, F. G. Combination antiviral therapy for influenza: 
predictions from modeling of human infections. J. Infect. Dis. 205, 1642–1645 (2012).
189.	 Dunning, J., Baillie, J. K., Cao, B. & Hayden, F. G. International severe acute respiratory 
and emerging infection consortium (ISARIC). Antiviral combinations for severe influenza. 
Lancet Infect. Dis. 14, 1259–1270 (2014).
190.	 Hammond, J. et al. Oral nirmatrelvir for high-risk, nonhospitalized adults with COVID-19. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 1397–1408 (2022).
191.	 Jeong, J. H. et al. Combination therapy with nirmatrelvir and molnupiravir improves the 
survival of SARS-CoV-2 infected mice. Antivir. Res. 208, 105430 (2022).
192.	 National Institues of Health (NIH). Antiviral agents, including antibody products. NIH.GOV 
https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/therapies/antivirals-including-antibody- 
products/summary-recommendations/ (2023).
193.	 Szemiel, A. M. et al. In vitro selection of remdesivir resistance suggests evolutionary 
predictability of SARS-CoV-2. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009929 (2021).
194.	 Stevens, L. J. et al. Mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 RNA dependent RNA polymerase  
confer resistance to remdesivir by distinct mechanisms. Sci. Transl Med. 14, eabo0718 
(2022).
195.	 Zhou, Y. et al. Nirmatrelvir resistant SARS-CoV-2 variants with high fitness in vitro. 
Sci. Adv. 8, eadd7197 (2022).
196.	 Malone, B. & Campbell, E. A. Molnupiravir: coding for catastrophe. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
28, 706–708 (2021).
197.	 Pillai, S. K., Wong, J. K. & Barbour, J. D. Turning up the volume on mutational pressure: 
is more of a good thing always better? (A case study of HIV-1 Vif and APOBEC3). 
Retrovirology 5, 26 (2008).
198.	 Donovan-Banfield, I. et al. Characterisation of SARS-CoV-2 genomic variation in response to 
molnupiravir treatment in the AGILE phase IIa clinical trial. Nat. Commun. 13, 7284 (2022).
199.	 Vignuzzi, M., Stone, J. K., Arnold, J. J., Cameron, C. E. & Ansino, R. Quasispecies diversity 
determines pathogenesis through cooperative interactions in a viral population. Nature 
439, 344–348 (2006).
200.	Pfeiffer, J. K. & Kirkegaard, K. Increased fidelity reduces poliovirus fitness and virulence 
under selective pressure in mice. PLoS Pathog. 1, e11 (2005).
201.	 Sanderson, T., Hisner, R., Donovan-Banfield, I., Peackock, T. & Ruis, C. Identification of 
a molnupiravir-associated mutational signature in SARS-CoV-2 sequencing databases. 
Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.26.23284998 (2023).
202.	Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variants B.1.351 and P.1 escape from neutralizing 
antibodies. Cell 184, 2384–2393.e12 (2021).
203.	Focosi, D. et al. Monoclonal antibody therapies against SARS-CoV-2. Lancet Infect. 
Dis. 22, e311–e326 (2022).
204.	Choudhary, M. C. et al. Emergence of SARS-CoV-2 escape mutations during Bamlanivimab 
therapy in a phase II randomized clinical trial. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 1906–1917 (2022).
205.	Gottlieb, R. L. et al. Effect of bamlanivimab as monotherapy or in combination with 
etesevimab on viral load in patients with mild to moderate COVID-19: a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA 325, 632–644 (2021).
206.	Greaney, A. J. et al. Mapping mutations to the SARS-CoV-2 RBD that escape binding by 
different classes of antibodies. Nat. Commun. 12, 4196 (2021).
207.	 Chen, R. E. et al. Resistance of SARS-CoV-2 variants to neutralization by monoclonal and 
serum-derived polyclonal antibodies. Nat. Med. 27, 717–726 (2021).
208.	Corman, V. M., Muth, D., Niemeyer, D. & Drosten, C. Hosts and sources of endemic human 
coronaviruses. Adv. Virus Res. 100, 163–188 (2018).
209.	Cui, J., Li, F. & Shi, Z.-L. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 17, 181–192 (2019).
210.	 Cheng, V. C. C., Lau, S. K. P., Woo, P. C. Y. & Yuen, K. Y. Severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus as an agent of emerging and reemerging infection. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 20, 
660–694 (2007).
211.	 Kiyuka, P. K. et al. Human coronavirus NL63 molecular epidemiology and evolutionary 
patterns in rural coastal Kenya. J. Infect. Dis. 217, 1728–1739 (2018).
212.	 Larson, H. E., Reed, S. E. & Tyrrell, D. A. Isolation of rhinoviruses and coronaviruses from 
38 colds in adults. J. Med. Virol. 5, 221–229 (1980).
213.	 Vijgen, L. et al. Complete genomic sequence of human coronavirus OC43: molecular 
clock analysis suggests a relatively recent zoonotic coronavirus transmission event. 
J. Virol. 79, 1595–1604 (2005).
214.	 Pollett, S. et al. A comparative recombination analysis of human coronaviruses and 
implications for the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Sci. Rep. 11, 17365 (2021).
215.	 Akaishi, T. Insertion-and-deletion mutations between the genomes of SARS-CoV, 
SARS-CoV-2, and bat coronavirus RaTG13. Microbiol. Spectr. 10, e0071622 (2022).
216.	 Coutard, B. et al. The spike glycoprotein of the new coronavirus 2019-nCoV contains 
a furin-like cleavage site absent in CoV of the same clade. Antivir. Res. 176, 104742 (2020).
217.	 Ren, W. et al. Difference in receptor usage between severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS) coronavirus and SARS-like coronavirus of bat origin. J. Virol. 82, 1899–1907 (2008).
218.	 Guo, H. et al. Identification of a novel lineage bat SARS-related coronaviruses that use 
bat ACE2 receptor. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 10, 1507–1514 (2021).
219.	 Chinese SARS Molecular Epidemiology Consortium. Molecular evolution of the SARS 
coronavirus during the course of the SARS epidemic in China. Science 303, 1666–1669 
(2004).
Acknowledgements
A.K. was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) Consolidator Grant 
PALVIREVOL-101001623.
Author contributions
All authors researched data for the article. P.V.M. and A.K. contributed substantially to 
discussion of the content. P.V.M., M.G., M.B., P.S, N.I.S. and A.K. wrote the article. P.V.M., 
M.G. and A.K. reviewed and/or edited the manuscript before submission.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Disclaimer The views expressed in this article are purely those of the authors and may not, 
under any circumstances, be regarded as an official position of the European Commission.
Peer review information Nature Reviews Microbiology thanks Thomas Connor, Robert Garry 
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Related links
Nextstrain: https://nextstrain.org/
© Springer Nature Limited 2023
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to 
this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
