--- Page 1 ---
Resource
Generation of Functional Human
Pancreatic b Cells In Vitro
Felicia W. Pagliuca,1,3 Jeffrey R. Millman,1,3 Mads Gu¨ rtler,1,3 Michael Segel,1 Alana Van Dervort,1 Jennifer Hyoje Ryu,1
Quinn P. Peterson,1 Dale Greiner,2 and Douglas A. Melton1,*
1Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, 7 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA
2Diabetes Center of Excellence, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 368 Plantation Street, AS7-2051, Worcester, MA 01605, USA
3Co-ﬁrst author
*Correspondence: dmelton@harvard.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.040
SUMMARY
The generation of insulin-producing pancreatic b
cells from stem cells in vitro would provide an un-
precedented cell source for drug discovery and cell
transplantation therapy in diabetes. However, insu-
lin-producing cells previously generated from human
pluripotent stem cells (hPSC) lack many functional
characteristics of bona ﬁde b cells. Here, we report
a scalable differentiation protocol that can generate
hundreds of millions of glucose-responsive b cells
from hPSC in vitro. These stem-cell-derived b cells
(SC-b) express markers found in mature b cells, ﬂux
Ca2+ in response to glucose, package insulin into
secretory granules, and secrete quantities of insulin
comparable to adult b cells in response to multiple
sequential glucose challenges in vitro. Furthermore,
these cells secrete human insulin into the serum of
mice shortly after transplantation in a glucose-regu-
lated manner, and transplantation of these cells ame-
liorates hyperglycemia in diabetic mice.
INTRODUCTION
The discovery of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC) opened
the possibility of generating replacement cells and tissues
in the laboratory that could be used for disease treatment and
drug screening. Recent research has moved the stem cell ﬁeld
closer to that goal through development of strategies to generate
cells that would otherwise be difﬁcult to obtain, like neurons or
cardiomyocytes (Kriks et al., 2011; Shiba et al., 2012; Son
et al., 2011). These cells have also been transplanted into animal
models, in some cases with a beneﬁcial effect like suppression of
arrhythmias with stem-cell-derived cardiomyocytes (Shiba et al.,
2012), restoration of locomotion after spinal injury with oligoden-
drocyte progenitors (Keirstead et al., 2005), or improved vision
after transplantation of retinal epithelial cells into rodent models
of blindness (Lu et al., 2009).
One of the rapidly growing diseases that may be treatable by
stem-cell-derived tissues is diabetes, affecting >300 million peo-
ple worldwide, according to the International Diabetes Federa-
tion. Type 1 diabetes results from autoimmune destruction of b
cells in the pancreatic islet, whereas the more common type 2 dia-
betes results from peripheral tissue insulin resistance and b cell
dysfunction. Diabetic patients, particularly those suffering from
type 1 diabetes, could potentially be cured through transplanta-
tion of new b cells. Patients transplanted with cadaveric human is-
lets can be made insulin independent for 5 years or longer via this
strategy, but this approach is limited because of the scarcity and
quality of donor islets (Bellin et al., 2012). The generation of an
unlimited supply of human b cells from stem cells could extend
this therapy to millions of new patients and could be an important
test case for translating stem cell biology into the clinic. This is
because only a single cell type, the b cell, likely needs to be gener-
ated, and the mode of delivery is understood: transplantation to a
vascularized location within the body with immunoprotection.
Pharmaceutical screening to identify new drugs that improve b
cell function, survival, or proliferation is also hindered by limited
supplies of islets and high variability due to differential causes
of death, donor genetic background, and other factors in their
isolation. A consistent, uniform supply of stem-cell-derived b cells
would provide a unique and valuable drug discovery platform for
diabetes. Additionally, genetically diverse stem-cell-derived b
cells could be used for disease modeling in vitro or in vivo.
Studies on pancreatic development in model organisms
(Gamer and Wright, 1995; Henry and Melton, 1998; Ninomiya
et al., 1999; Apelqvist et al., 1999; Kim et al., 2000; Hebrok
et al., 2000; Murtaugh et al., 2003) identiﬁed genes and signals
important for the pancreatic lineage, and these have been effec-
tively used to form cells in the b cell lineage in vitro from hPSC.
Deﬁnitive endoderm and subsequent pancreatic progenitors
can now be differentiated with high efﬁciencies (Kroon et al.,
2008; D’Amour et al., 2005, 2006; Rezania et al., 2012). These
cells can differentiate into functional b cells within 3–4 months
following transplantation into rodents (Kroon et al., 2008; Rezania
et al., 2012), indicating that some cells in the preparation contain
the developmental potential to develop into b cells if provided
enough time and appropriate cues. Unfortunately, the months-
long process the cells undergo in vivo is not understood, and it
is unclear whether this process of in vivo differentiation would
also occur in human patients. Attempts to date at generating
insulin-producing (INS+) cells from human pancreatic progeni-
tors in vitro have generated cells with immature or abnormal
phenotypes. These cells either fail to perform glucose-stimulated
428
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 2 ---
insulin secretion in vitro, fail to express appropriate b cell markers
such as NKX6-1 or PDX1, abnormally coexpress other hormones
like glucagon (GCG), fail to function after transplantation in vivo,
or display a combination of these abnormal features (D’Amour
et al., 2006; Cheng et al., 2012; Hrvatin et al., 2014; Narayanan
et al., 2014; Xie et al., 2013; Nostro et al., 2011).
Herein, we report the discovery of a strategy for large-scale
production of functional human b cells from hPSC in vitro. By
using sequential modulation of multiple signaling pathways in a
three-dimensional cell culture system, without any transgenes
or
genetic modiﬁcation,
we
generate
glucose-responsive,
monohormonal insulin-producing cells that show key features
of a bona ﬁde b cell, including coexpression of key b cell markers
and b cell ultrastructure. Furthermore, these cells mimic the
function of human islets both in vitro and in vivo. Finally, we
demonstrate the potential utility of these cells for in vivo trans-
plantation therapy for diabetes.
RESULTS
Generation of Glucose-Sensing Insulin-Secreting
b Cells In Vitro
Our strategy to generate functional b cells from hPSC in vitro is
outlined in Figure 1A. To produce large numbers, we used a scal-
able suspension-based culture system that can generate >108
hPSCs and later differentiated cell types (modiﬁed from Schulz
et al., 2012). Clusters of cells (100–200 mm in diameter, each
cluster containing several hundred cells) from a human embry-
onic stem cell (hESC) line (HUES8) or two human-induced plurip-
otent stem cell (hiPSC) lines (hiPSC-1 and hiPSC-2) were
induced into deﬁnitive endoderm (>95% SOX17+ cells, DE cells
in Figure 1A) and subsequently early pancreatic progenitors
(>85% PDX1+ cells, PP1 cells in Figure 1A).
Transplantation of pancreatic progenitors expressing PDX1+/
NKX6-1+ (PP2 in Figure 1A) into mice gives rise to functional b
cells in vivo after 3–4 months (Kroon et al., 2008; Rezania et al.,
2012). And previous studies had shown that these PDX1+/
NKX6-1+ pancreatic progenitors (PP2) could be further differen-
tiated in vitro into some INS+ cells along with INS+/GCG+ or
INS+/SST+ polyhormonal (PH) cells (Nostro et al., 2011; Rezania
et al., 2012; Thowfeequ et al., 2007; Aguayo-Mazzucato et al.,
2013; D’Amour et al., 2006; Hrvatin et al., 2014). We use the
nomenclature PH (polyhormonal, Figure 1A) to refer to this cell
population of in-vitro-differentiated hPSCs. Transcriptional anal-
ysis of in-vitro-differentiated PH cells showed that these cells
resemble human fetal and not adult b cells (Hrvatin et al.,
2014). Because these PH cells show neither glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion (GSIS) nor other key properties of bona ﬁde b
Figure 1. SC-b Cells Generated In Vitro
Secrete Insulin in Response to Multiple
Sequential High-Glucose Challenges like
Primary Human b Cells
(A) Schematic of directed differentiation from
hPSC into INS+ cells via new or previously pub-
lished control differentiations.
(B–D) Representative ELISA measurements of
secreted human insulin from HUES8 SC-b cells
(B), PH cells (C), and primary b (1b) cells (D)
challenged sequentially with 2, 20, 2, 20, 2, and
20 mM glucose, with a 30 min incubation for each
concentration (see Experimental Procedures). Af-
ter sequential low/high-glucose challenges, cells
were depolarized with 30 mM KCl.
(E–G) Box and whisker plots of secreted human
insulin from different biological batches of HUES8
(open circles) and hiPSC SC-b (black circles) cells
(E; n = 12), biological batches of PH cells (F; n = 5),
and primary b cells (G; n = 4). Each circle is the
average value for all sequential challenges with
2 mM or 20 mM glucose in a batch. Insulin
secretion at 20 mM ranged 0.23–2.7 mIU/103 cells
for SC-b cells and 1.5–4.5 mIU/103 cells for human
islets, and the stimulation index ranged 0.4–4.1 for
SC-b cells and 0.6–4.8 for primary adult. The thick
horizontal line indicates the median.
See alsoFiguresS1and S2A and Table S1. *p< 0.05
when comparing insulin secretion at 20 mM versus
2 mM with paired t test. Act A, activin A; CHIR,
CHIR99021, a GSK3a/b inhibitor; KGF, keratinocyte
growth factor or FGF family member 7; RA, retinoic
acid; SANT1, sonic hedgehog pathway antagonist;
LDN, LDN193189, a BMP type 1 receptor inhibitor;
PdbU, Phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate, a protein kinase C
activator; Alk5i, Alk5 receptor inhibitor II; T3, triio-
dothyronine, a thyroid hormone; XXI, g-secretase
inhibitor; Betacellulin, EGF family member.
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
429


--- Page 3 ---
cells, we returned to the earlier pancreatic progenitor step (PP2)
to investigate ways to make NKX6-1+/C-peptide+ (EN cells in
Figure 1A) and functional b cells (SC-b cells in Figure 1A).
We ﬁrst extended the time in culture with the FGF family mem-
ber KGF, hedgehog inhibitor SANT1, and a low concentration of
retinoic acid to generate high levels of NKX6-1+/PDX1+ coex-
pressing pancreatic progenitor clusters (>55% NKX6-1+/PDX1+
cells, PP2 cells in Figure 1A). These PP2 cells were the starting
point to make differentiated cells that would respond to glucose
and mimic natural b cells. Systematic testing of the concentra-
tion and exposure time of numerous factors (small-molecule ago-
nists and antagonists and assorted growth factors) on pancreatic
progenitors (PP2 cells in Figure 1A) led to the development of a
new differentiation protocol. This protocol takes 4–5 weeks and
involves a unique combination of sequential culture steps using
factors that affect signaling in numerous pathways, including
signaling by wnt, activin, hedgehog, EGF, TGFb, thyroid hormone,
and retinoic acid, as well as g-secretase inhibition (see Experi-
mental Procedures). In all, we tested >150 combinations involving
>70 compounds, many of which had been described in the litera-
ture as playing a role in pancreatic biology. Most factors and com-
binations had little appreciable effect on cell function and gene
expression, but we were able to develop a protocol using 11
different factors that provided a signiﬁcant improvement in func-
tion and b-cell-like gene expression (Table S1 available online).
A key functional feature of a b cell is its ability to repeatedly
perform GSIS. Nearly all existing directed differentiation proto-
cols generate insulin-expressing cells from hPSC (see PH in Fig-
ure 1A) that are defective in GSIS in vitro; these cells fail to
respond to even a single glucose challenge. In contrast, the
SC-b cells generated from both hESC and hiPSC cells with the
new protocol respond to multiple sequential high-glucose chal-
lenges and depolarization with KCl (Figures 1B, S1, and S2A).
This data contrasts with the response of PH cells (Figures 1C),
which secrete very low amounts of insulin and are not glucose
responsive. SC-b cell clusters and primary adult (cadaveric) is-
lets show a similar response to sequential glucose challenges
(compare Figures 1B and 1D).
Twelve independent differentiation batches of SC-b cells
(eight hESC and four hiPSC) were tested with three sequential
high-glucose challenges (three to four replicates of each) and
compared to ﬁve batches of PH cell clusters and four sets of
cadaveric islets (Figures 1E–1G). Because the SC-b cells outper-
formed PH cells, we compared SC-b cell clusters to primary islet
cells. The stimulation index, as calculated by the ratio of insulin
secreted in high glucose (20 mM) to low glucose (2 mM), was
similar for SC-b cells and primary adult islets, 2.2 ± 0.3 and 2.1
± 0.9, respectively.
Some
batch-to-batch
and
donor-to-donor
variation
is
observed for both primary adult b cells and SC-b cells. This vari-
ation is not unexpected for islets from cadavers nor for cells
taken through a 35 day protocol involving ﬁve basal media and
11 combinatorially added factors (Figures 1E and 1G). Some
batches of SC-b cells and primary human islets fail to respond
to individual glucose challenges (see Figures S1A and S1C).
But overall, SC-b cell clusters and primary islets responded to
high glucose challenges at a similar frequency: 75% ± 8% and
72% ± 17%, respectively.
The amount of insulin secreted per cell in response to 20 mM
glucose by SC-b cells was similar to that secreted by primary
adult b cells, averaging 1.6 ± 0.2 and 3.6 ± 0.7 mIU/103 cells,
respectively. Notably, some SC-b cell batches secreted as
much insulin as cadaveric islets (see Figures 1E and 1G). Total
insulin content per cell was 240 ± 50 mIU/103 cell for SC-b clus-
ters (two batches) and 200 ± 40 mIU/103 for primary islets (one
batch). The proinsulin-to-insulin ratio was 0.030 ± 0.001 and
0.029 ± 0.006 for SC-b and primary adult b cells, respectively.
Taken together, these data highlight the difference between
SC-b and PH cell clusters and suggest that the in vitro function
of SC-b cells is similar to their bona ﬁde adult b cell counterparts.
Calcium Flux in SC-b Cells
We sought to further conﬁrm the in vitro function of SC-b cells by
measuring changes in intracellular Ca2+. b cells sense changing
glucose levels through calcium signaling; increasing glucose
levels leads to membrane depolarization, causing an inﬂux of cal-
cium ions, which triggers insulin exocytosis (Mohammed et al.,
2009). Calcium inﬂux depends onglucose transport and metabolic
enzymes as well as functioning potassium ion channels (Rutter
and Hodson, 2013). We monitored calcium inﬂux in cell clusters
stained with Fluo-4 AM, a cell-permeable ﬂuorescent calcium indi-
cator dye, in real time, using ﬂuorescent microscopy (Figure 2A).
This method allowed us to analyze calcium ﬂux at both the popu-
lation and single-cell level. The population analysis shows that
cells in both SC-b cell clusters and primary adult islets respond
to sequential glucose challenges by repeatedly increasing intra-
cellular Ca2+ in a similar manner, consistent with normal glucose
responsiveness. In contrast, PH cell clusters displayed an
abnormal calcium response (Figure 2B). Single-cell analysis re-
veals that most individual cells in SC-b cell clusters and primary
adult islets respond to two to three sequential glucose challenges
by ﬂuxing calcium, whereas most cells from PH cell clusters do not
(Figures 2C–2E). These data show that both the entire population
as well as individual cells within the SC-b cell clusters ﬂux calcium
similarly to primary human islet cells and further support the
conclusion that these SC-b cells function in vitro.
Stem-Cell-Derived b Cells Resemble Primary
Human b Cells
The results in Figures 1 and 2 show that SC-b cells display the
physiological function in vitro of secreting insulin in response to
glucose. We next analyzed protein expression, RNA expression,
and ultrastructure of SC-b cells. As with many previously re-
ported hPSC-derived insulin-producing cells, our PH protocol
C-peptide+ cells fail to coexpress the b cell transcription factor
NKX6-1. Conversely, SC-b cells, like islet b cells, stained positive
for cytoplasmic C-peptide and the nuclear protein NKX6-1 (Fig-
ures 3A and S2B). SC-b cells stain positive for both insulin and
C-peptide, a stoichiometric byproduct of proinsulin processing,
indicating that the insulin produced comes from cell-endoge-
nous insulin synthesis (data not shown).
Nuclear expression of the transcription factor PDX1 is charac-
teristic of human b cells, and most PH cells do not coexpress
PDX1 in C-peptide+ cells (Figure 3B). Both cadaveric islet b cells
and SC-b cells coexpress this key protein in C-peptide+ cells
(Figures 3B and S2C).
430
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 4 ---
Others have noted previously (Bruin et al., 2014; Hrvatin
et al., 2014) that most protocols for pancreatic differentiation
generate many cells that coexpress glucagon and insulin/C-
peptide+, and we observed polyhormonal cells in the control
PH differentiations. In contrast, the majority of C-peptide+ cells
in SC-b differentiations are monohormonal by IHC (Figures 3C
and S2D) and by ﬂow cytometry (Figure S3). We also observed
a minor population of monohormonal SST+ d cells and GCG+ a
cells (Figures 3C, S2D, and S3). There are also a few polyhor-
monal cells—on average, 7.7% ± 0.7% of C-peptide+ cells co-
express glucagon and 4.7% ± 0.1% coexpress somatostatin
(Figure S3).
The most parsimonious explanation is that the SC-b cells can
be found within the NKX6-1+/C-peptide+ monohormonal popu-
lation. Flow cytometry reveals that the new protocol produces an
average of 33% ± 2% (n = 12) NKX6-1+/C-peptide+ cells, similar
to the 26% ± 3% (n = 3) average observed in cadaveric islets
Figure 2. SC-b Cells Flux Cytosolic Ca2+ in
Response
to
Multiple
Sequential
High-
Glucose Challenges like Primary Human b
Cells
(A) Schematic of population level and single-cell
level detection of cytosolic Ca2+ using Fluo-4 AM
staining. Population level measurements were
taken on individual whole clusters (marked by
large red circle in the schematic), and individual
cells within intact clusters (marked by small red
circles) were analyzed for single-cell analysis.
(B) Representative population measurements of
dynamic normalized Fluo-4 ﬂuorescence intensity
for HUES8 SC-b cells, primary b cells, and PH cells
challenged sequentially with 2, 20, 2, 20, 2, and
20 mM glucose and 30 mM KCl. The x axis rep-
resents time (s).
(C) Fluorescence images of Fluo-4 AM staining
used in single cell analysis.
(D) Representative images showing single cells
that responded to three (yellow), two (orange), one
(blue), and zero (red) glucose challenges.
(E) Quantiﬁcation of the frequency of SC-b cells
(n = 156), primary b cells (n = 114), and PH cells (n =
138) that responded to 20 mM glucose.
Scale bar, 100 mm.
(Figures 3D and S2E). The remainder of
cells in the SC-b clusters are either endo-
crine cells (a or d cells that express the-
hormones
GCG
or
SST)
or
PDX1+
pancreatic progenitors that have not
differentiated into endocrine cells. We
did not observe any residual cells ex-
pressing pluripotency markers such as
OCT4. The non-b cells within a human
islet differ from SC-b cell clusters, having
higher proportions of a and d cells.
The improved protein expression of
several key b cell markers indicates that
the transcriptional network of SC-b cells
better matches that of human islet b cells.
Recent work had demonstrated that INS+ PH cells, generated by
previous protocols, do not resemble adult islet INS+ b cells (Hrva-
tin et al., 2014; Xie et al., 2013). Microarray analysis of sorted INS+
cells generated with previous protocols showed that they cluster
with fetal b cells rather than functional adult human b cells.
To compare SC-b cells to adult human islets, we sorted
out INS+/NKX6-1+ cells from SC-b cell differentiations and
performed global gene expression analysis. The SC-b cells clus-
tered with adult b cells, unlike fetal b cells or INS+ PH cells (Hrva-
tin et al., 2014) (Figure 3E and 3F). Furthermore, expression of
many canonical b cell genes, such as PDX1, MNX1, and
SLC30A8 (ZNT8), were more similar between SC-b cells and
adult b cells than PH cells, whereas others, such as KLF9,
PCSK1, and PCSK2, are still differentially expressed (Figure S4).
We conclude that SC-b cells made ex vivo are most similar, but
not completely identical, to cadaveric b cells by transcriptional
analysis.
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
431


--- Page 5 ---
Figure 3. SC-b Cells Express Human b Cell Markers at Protein and Gene Expression Level
(A) Representative immunohistochemistry (IHC) of HUES8 SC-b cells, primary b cells, and PH cells stained for C-peptide (green) and NKX6-1 (red).
(B) Representative IHC of cells stained for C-peptide (green) and PDX1 (red).
(C) Representative IHC of cells stained for C-peptide (green) and glucagon (red) with the corresponding DAPI stain (blue).
Enlarged insets in (A–C) show that staining for transcription factors (NKX6-1 and PDX1) is nuclear and cytoplasmic for C-peptide, except for the PH cells.
(D) Representative ﬂow cytometry dot plots and population percentages of cells stained for C-peptide and NKX6-1. AU, arbitrary units.
(legend continued on next page)
432
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 6 ---
SC-b Cell Ultrastructure
In light of the observation that SC-b cells secrete insulin in a
physiological manner in vitro, we hypothesized that SC-b cells
might also package insulin protein into secretory granules, as
do primary b cells. b cells package insulin into secretory granules
that initially appear as pale gray cores surrounded by a small
electron-lucent area or light halo, and these condense into gran-
ules with dark polygonal crystalline cores surrounded by a light
halo (Deconinck et al., 1971; Like and Orci, 1972). Previous
studies of INS+ cells showed abnormal granules that resemble
a-like granules with round cores surrounded by a dark gray
halo (PH cells; D’Amour et al., 2006; Deconinck et al., 1971;
Like and Orci, 1972) and/or abnormal granules of indistinct hor-
monal character. We recapitulated these results with our control
protocol, producing INS+ cells that had abnormal and a-like
granules and few, if any, b cell granules (Figures 4A and 4B). In
contrast, our new differentiation strategy generates SC-b cells
that package and crystallize insulin protein into granules that
are structurally similar to primary b cell insulin granules. Both
developing insulin granules and mature, crystallized insulin gran-
ules are observed in SC-b cells and primary human b cells. SC-b
cells and primary b cells averaged 66 ± 11 and 77 ± 8 insulin
granules per cell, respectively (Figure 4C). Immunogold labeling
with particles against insulin and glucagon showed that granules
in the PH cells contained both insulin and glucagon protein,
whereas primary human b cell and SC-b cell granules contained
only insulin (Figure 4D). Thus, this key ultrastructural feature of
adult human b cells is mirrored in SC-b cells.
Stem-Cell-Derived b Cells Function In Vivo after
Transplantation
To test their capacity to function in vivo, we transplanted SC-b
cells under the kidney capsule of immunocompromised mice
(Figure 5 and Tables S2 and S3). When primary human islets
(500 ieq, or islet equivalents) are transplanted, human insulin is
detected in the serum of glucose-challenged mice within 2 weeks
(Figure 5A). Conversely, when 5 million pancreatic progenitor
cells are transplanted into mice, no insulin is detected at 2 weeks
posttransplant (data not shown) (Kroon et al., 2008; Schulz et al.,
2012; Rezania et al., 2012). A portion of the cells in this pancre-
atic progenitor population will differentiate further and secrete in-
sulin, but only after a 3–4 month long ill-understood maturation
phase in vivo.
We tested whether insulin is detectable in serum of animals
transplanted with 5 million SC-b cells sooner than 3–4 months.
After a brief surgical recovery period (2 weeks), mice trans-
planted with SC-b cells were injected with glucose and serum
was collected 30 min later. ELISA measurement of human insulin
in the serum revealed that SC-b cells from both hESC and hiPSC
secrete insulin into the host bloodstream within 2 weeks, the
earliest posttransplantation time point tested (Figure 5A). As a
control, we also transplanted the same number of PH cells and
pancreatic progenitors, neither of which secreted signiﬁcant
levels of insulin in vivo within 2 weeks, as has been previously
published (Kroon et al., 2008) (data not shown and Figure 5A).
To test whether the SC-b cells secrete insulin in response to
glucose, we measured human insulin in the bloodstream of a
subset of mice both before (0 min) and after (30 min) an acute
glucose challenge. 73% of SC-b-cell-transplanted mice (27/37
animals) showed increased human insulin in the bloodstream af-
ter a glucose challenge, 2 weeks posttransplant (Figure 5A and
Tables S2 and S3). By comparison, 75% of mice transplanted
with human islets (9 out of 12 animals) showed increased human
insulin secretion after the glucose challenge. This increase in hu-
man insulin with transplanted SC-b cells is statistically signiﬁcant
(p = 0.0008). As another measure of in vivo GSIS, the average ra-
tio of insulin secreted after the glucose challenge compared to
before it was 1.9 ± 0.3 for islet transplants and 1.7 ± 0.2 for
SC-b cell transplants. These in vivo stimulation indices ranged
from 0.4 to 4.3 for islet transplants and from 0.5 to 3.8 for SC-b
cell transplants (Tables S2 and S3).
After 2 weeks posttransplantation, animals were sacriﬁced and
the engrafted kidneys were removed for histology. IHC showed
that both SC-b cell and human islet grafts contain C-peptide+
cells adjacent to the mouse kidney (Figures 5B and S5). Analysis
of C-peptide and glucagon staining further revealed that the SC-
b cells remained monohormonal after transplantation (Figures 5B
and S5). A minor population of GCG+ cells, which was observed
before transplantation (Figures 3C, S2D, and S3), was also
observed in the grafts (Figures 5B and S5).
Utility of Stem-Cell-Derived b Cells for
Treating Diabetes
A major challenge for the stem cell ﬁeld has been to generate
differentiated cells that mimic their normal, in vivo counterparts.
We examined how useful SC-b cells would be as a cell therapy in
a diabetic animal model. One useful diabetes model is the Akita
mouse (Yoshioka et al., 1997), which has a mutation in the insulin
gene, leading to protein misfolding, irreversible b cell failure, and
progressively severe hyperglycemia. Immunodeﬁcient NOD-
Rag1null IL2rgnull Ins2Akita (NRG-Akita) mice can be restored to
normoglycemia via mouse or human islet transplantation (Brehm
et al., 2010).
We tested whether SC-b cells could also function to control
diabetic hyperglycemia. Transplantation of SC-b cells, but not
PH cells, into the kidney capsule of NRG-Akita mice rapidly
reversed the progressively worsening hyperglycemia observed
in these animals (Figure 6A). Fasting blood glucose measu-
rements
of
mice
transplanted
with
SC-b
cells
averaged
<200 mg/dl, whereas those transplanted with control PH cells
showed progressively higher blood glucose levels that ap-
proached 600 mg/dl, as has been observed for nontransplanted
NRG-Akita mice (Figure 6A) (Brehm et al., 2010). Mice that
received SC-b cells also rapidly cleared glucose from the blood
(E) Hierarchal clustering based on all genes measured by transcriptional microarray of undifferentiated HUES8, PH cells, fetal b cells, and adult primary b cells
sorted for INS (data from Hrvatin et al., 2014) and SC-b cells sorted for INS and NKX6-1.
(F) Heatmap of the 100 genes with the most variance across all samples.
All images were taken with a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope. See also Figures S2B, S2C, S3, and S4. CP, C-peptide; SST, somatostatin; GCG, glucagon.
Scale bar = 100 mm.
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
433


--- Page 7 ---
after a glucose injection, similar to the glucose clearance found
in a separate independent cohort of NRG-Akita mice trans-
planted with 4000 IEQ of human islets (Figures 6B). We
measured human insulin in the bloodstream 18 weeks after
transplantation and found mice that received SC-b cells main-
tained human insulin secretion (Figure 6C).
Mice transplanted with SC-b cells also survived better than
control mice: two out of six mice that received PH cells died
Figure 4. SC-b Cell Insulin Granules Are Structurally Similar to Primary Human b Cell Granules
(A) Electron microscopy images of granules within sectioned cells, highlighting representative crystallized insulin granules (red), early insulin granules (yellow), and
mixed endocrine granules (blue) found in HUES8 SC-b cells, primary b cells, and PH cells. Scale bar, 500 nm.
(B) Higher-magniﬁcation images of granules highlighted in (A). Scale bar, 500 nm.
(C) Box and whisker plot of the number of insulin and early insulin granules per cell. The cross indicates mean, and the thick horizontal line indicates median. n = 24
cells from two batches of differentiation for HUES8 SC-b cells, and n = 30 cells from two donors of primary human b cells. PH cells are not shown because no
mature insulin or early insulin granules were observed.
(D) Electron microscopy images of cells labeled with immunogold staining showing granules that contain insulin (smaller 5 nm black dots) and/or glucagon (larger
15 nm black dots). Representative immunogold particles are highlighted with red arrows (insulin) and blue arrows (glucagon). Scale bar, 100 nm.
434
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 8 ---
within 8 weeks of transplantation, compared to zero out of six
mice that received SC-b cells. By the end of >4 months of obser-
vation posttransplantation, ﬁve out of six mice that received PH
cells died, compared to one out of six mice that received SC-b
cells. Thus, SC-b cells are capable of secreting insulin and
rapidly ameliorating progressive hyperglycemia in a diabetic
mouse model.
DISCUSSION
Here, we show that functional human SC-b cells can be directly
generated from human pluripotent stem cells in vitro. The data
presented demonstrate that these cells function similarly to pri-
mary human b cells both in vitro and in vivo posttransplantation.
These cells can be generated without genetic modiﬁcation and
in large numbers (billions of cells). Though not all of the cells pre-
sent at the end of the protocol are SC-b cells, the percentage of
NKX6-1+/C-peptide+ cells in the clusters is similar to that found
in human islets, and the size of the clusters is comparable,
though slightly larger on average than human islets (200–
250 mm diameter versus 100–150 mm diameter). This is all
accomplished ex vivo by the addition of deﬁned factors, without
the addition of mesenchymal or endothelial cells that normally
accompany b cell development.
Figure 5. Transplanted SC-b Cells Function
Rapidly In Vivo
(A) ELISA measurements of human insulin from the
serum of individual mice transplanted with com-
parable numbers of HUES8 SC-b cells (5 3 106
cells), primary human b cells (500–1,000 IEQ), or
PH cells (5 3 106 cells). Measurements were taken
before (white bars) and 30 min after (black bars)
a
glucose
injection
of
mice
2
weeks
post-
transplantation.
(B) Representative IHC of cells 2 weeks post-
transplantation
in
(A)
stained
with
C-peptide
(green) and glucagon (GCG; red) to conﬁrm pres-
ence of graft.
All images were taken with a Olympus IX51 mi-
croscope. See also Figure S5 and Tables S2 and
S3. Scale bar, 100 mm.
Although we observed that the global
gene expression patterns of SC-b cells
are more similar to adult human b cells
than to fetal b cells, or previously pro-
duced INS+ cells, gene expression differ-
ences still remain. One possibility is that
additional modiﬁcations to the culture
media or added factors could shift the
cells even closer to primary b cells.
Another possibility is that gene expres-
sion patterns in cadaveric b cells result
from varied causes of death of the donors,
the isolation and recovery process, or
shipping
or arise
from the
inﬂuence
of adjacent nonendocrine cells. Future
studies will include a more detailed anal-
ysis of the gene expression differences between SC-b and
primary b cells. Two differentiated b cell markers, UCN3 (Blum
et al., 2012) and MAFA (Aguayo-Mazzucato et al., 2013), were
not investigated because of the low sensitivity of the probes on
the DNA microarray. Looking ahead, it may be possible to use
the approach developed here to improve the number of SC-b
cells formed, as well as alter the differentiation of pancreatic
endocrine progenitors to produce all the other endocrine hor-
mone cell types (a, g, d, ε) and reconstruct the proportions found
in human islets.
A preparation of monohormonal cells that respond to a single
glucose challenge has been previously reported, but those cells
were not shown to express the key b cell identity marker NKX6-1
nor function in vivo (Cheng et al., 2012). Recent work has shown
that differentiation protocols that generate higher levels of
NKX6-1 lead to better outcomes for the pancreatic progenitor
transplants (Rezania et al., 2013). Conditional knockout studies
have shown that NKX6-1 is necessary for b cell function in adult
mouse islets, suggesting that coexpression of these factors in
SC-b cells may be part of the reason for their functional abilities
(Taylor et al., 2013). Despite the potential malleability of gene
expression levels, we consider the key feature of b cells to be
their function, i.e., their ability to repeatedly respond to glucose
by secreting insulin in a way that can be quantiﬁed and observed
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
435


--- Page 9 ---
in vivo and in vitro. The characterization of SC-b cell physiology
can be extended in future studies by performing a time course of
insulin synthesis and secretion and determining how long these
cells maintain this phenotype in vitro and in vivo.
We note that the insulin detected in serum of transplanted
SC-b cells was generally lower than that of animals transplanted
with cadaveric donor islets on a per cell basis (Tables S2 and S3).
One possibility is that the other cell types in islets, mesenchyme,
endothelial cells, or other endocrine cell types may help engraft-
ment or the vascularization necessary for glucose and insulin
exchange from the mouse vasculature. Another possibility is
that the slightly larger size of the SC-b clusters compared to
the human islets that we received may inﬂuence relative insulin
amounts secreted, as it has been observed that smaller islets
secrete more insulin per cell than larger islets (Fujita et al.,
2011). Nonetheless, the fact that transplantation of SC-b cells
consistently results in rapid and glucose-responsive insulin pro-
duction and that these cells function to treat diabetes in a mouse
model is encouraging.
The results described here suggest that SC-b cells present an
opportunity for cell therapy. Limited supplies of donated cadav-
eric islets and the very small amount of human b cell replication
achieved in vitro have severely limited human b cell supplies to
date. This limitation has restricted transplantation options for pa-
tients as well as high-throughput drug screening and disease
modeling. A single 68 kg (150 lb) patient requires roughly 340–
750 million transplanted islet cells to effectively resolve type 1
diabetes via islet transplantation (McCall and Shapiro, 2012;
Shapiro et al., 2006). The strategy that we describe here may
address this limitation, as it utilizes a renewable cell source
and a scalable method, with cells grown 300 million at a time
in suspension in a single 500 ml ﬂask. Thus, one or two ﬂasks
may be sufﬁcient for treatment of a patient. An additional clinical
advantage of SC-b cells compared to previously proposed ther-
apies using pancreatic progenitors is that these cells do not
require an extended posttransplantation period before obser-
ving insulin production. Immediate insulin production makes it
theoretically possible to reduce patient exogenous insulin re-
quirements from the ﬁrst few days posttransplantation.
These cells also present new opportunities for b cell studies. A
single ﬂask could provide enough cells for screening 30,000
compounds in a 384-well format seeded with 10,000 cells per
well. Unlike primary human b cells, SC-b cells can also be gener-
ated from pluripotent cells of any desired genetic background.
hiPSC, which function like hESC, can be generated from any ﬁ-
broblasts or other somatic cell types through introduction of a
small set of pluripotency genes (Takahashi and Yamanaka,
2006). hiPSC cells from patients with diabetes or other metabolic
syndromes have been derived. Work in progress in our labora-
tory has demonstrated that this protocol can be applied to differ-
entiate SC-b cells from diabetic hiPSC lines, which could be
used for disease modeling and the study of b cell function or sus-
ceptibility to stress or immune attack. Furthermore, technologies
like TALEN and CRISPR enable genome editing of hESC or
hiPSC cells to test variants identiﬁed by genome-wide asso-
ciation studies (GWAS). SC-b cell drug responses could be
compared between genetically matched pairs of mutant and
nonmutant b cells (Ding et al., 2013). Identiﬁcation and testing
of novel biomarkers for b cell function or pharmacogenetics is
also enabled by the combination of these technologies. Thus
SC-b cells provide a new platform for in vitro drug discovery
and characterization for human metabolism and diabetes.
The generation of SC-b cells provides a potentially useful step
toward the generation of islets and pancreatic organs. Incorpo-
rating pancreatic niche cells, such as mesenchymal or endothe-
lial cells, into cultures of stem-cell-derived pancreatic cells may
be beneﬁcial (Sneddon et al., 2012; Lammert et al., 2001). Other
evidence suggests that the presence of a and g cells may be
important for precise tuning of normal b cell function (Rodri-
guez-Diaz et al., 2011). Tissue engineering of a pancreatic organ
will require incorporation of exocrine and ductal tissue, possibly
Figure 6. Transplanted SC-b Cells Rapidly Ameliorate Hyperglyce-
mia in Diabetic Mice
(A) Fasting blood glucose measurements of progressively diabetic NRG-Akita
mice transplanted with HUES8 SC-b cells (5 3 106 cells; open circles; n = 6) or
PH cells (5 3 106 cells; closed square; n = 6 for 0, 18, and 28 days and n = 4 for
53, 84, and 112 days). Glucose measurements were saturated at 600 mg/dl.
*p < 0.05 comparing the two cell groups on the same day with unpaired t test.
Data presented as mean ± SEM.
(B) Blood glucose measurements of mice that have been transplanted
137 days prior with HUES8 SC-b cells (n = 5) or PH cells (n = 1) and a separate
independent cohort of mice transplanted 34 days prior with human islets
(4,000 IEQ; closed triangle; n = 6). Note: It was not possible to coordinate
receipt of human cadaveric islets and the production of SC-b cells. So the data
in Figure 6B come from a different animal cohort. One mouse that received
HUES8 SC-b cells died after a blood draw taken in (C), and ﬁve mice that
received PH cells died over the duration of the observation period. Data pre-
sented as mean ± SEM.
(C) ELISA measurements of human insulin from the serum of individual mice
transplanted with HUES8 SC-b cells (n = 6) or PH cells (n = 2). Mice were fasted
for 16 hr, and then blood glucose was measured before (white bars) and 30 min
after (black bars) a glucose injection of mice, 126 days posttransplantation. p <
0.05 for transplanted HUES8 SC-b cells insulin concentration 30 min versus
0 min after glucose injection with paired t test.
436
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 10 ---
in a speciﬁed architecture. Much work remains to be done to
achieve any of these therapeutic, disease modeling, drug dis-
covery, or tissue engineering goals, but the generation of SC-b
cells represents a step toward making a clinical impact with
stem cell biology.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cell Culture
Undifferentiated hPSC lines were maintained in mTeSR1 (StemCell Technolo-
gies) in 500 ml spinner ﬂasks (Corning, VWR) placed on a 9-Position stir plate
(Chemglass) set at rotation rate of 70 rpm in a 37C incubator, 5% CO2, and
100% humidity. The human embryonic stem cell line HUES8 and two hiPSC
cell lines (hiPSC-1 and hiPSC-2) were utilized for all experiments shown.
HUES8 cells are part of the NIH human embryonic stem cell registry eligible
for NIH funding and differentiate well into multiple lineages (Chetty et al., 2013).
Using signiﬁcant modiﬁcations of previously published protocols (Schulz
et al., 2012; Rezania et al., 2012; Hrvatin et al., 2014), populations of DE,
PGT, and PP1 cells were generated as described below. For initiation of SC-
b cell differentiation, HUES8, hiPSC-1, or hiPSC-2 cells were seeded at 6 3
105 cells/ml in mTeSR1 media+10mM Y27632. The differentiation was started
48 hr later for HUES8 and 72 hr later for hiPSC-1 and hiPSC-2 by changing me-
dia to Day media. Media changes were as follows. Day 1: S1 + 100 ng/ml Ac-
tivinA (R&D Systems) + 3 mM Chir99021 (Stemgent). Day 2: S1 + 100 ng/ml Ac-
tivinA. Days 4, 6: S2 + 50 ng/ml KGF (Peprotech). Days 7, 8: S3 + 50 ng/ml
KGF + 0.25 mM Sant1 (Sigma) + 2 mM RA (Sigma) + 200 nM LDN193189
(only Day 7) (Sigma) + 500 nM PdBU (EMD Millipore). Days 9, 11, 13: S3 +
50 ng/ml KGF + 0.25 mM Sant1 + 100 nM RA. Days 14, 16: S5 + 0.25 mM
Sant1 + 100 nM RA + 1 mM XXI (EMD Millipore) + 10 mM Alk5i II (Axxora) +
1 mM T3 (EMD Millipore) + 20 ng/ml Betacellulin (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc).
Days 18, 20: S5 + 25 nM RA + 1 mM XXI + 10 mM Alk5i II + 1 mM T3 + 20 ng/
ml Betacellulin. Days 21–35 (change every second day): S6 + 10 mM Alk5i
II + 1 mM T3. In the ﬁnal stage, cells were analyzed between 28 and 33 days
of the protocol.
For generation of PH protocol cells, HUES8 was used, and the same differen-
tiation protocol was followed until day 14. On days 14 and 16, cells were fed with
S3 + 1 mM Alk5i II, 200 nM LDN193189, and 100 nM RA (Rezania et al., 2012). On
day 18 and onward, cells were fed every other day with S3 + 100 nM RA. Cells
were maintained in this media until experimental analysis. Cells were main-
tained in culture and tested after the same number of days in differentiation me-
dia as the SC-b cells to control for the impact of time in culture.
Glucose-Stimulated Insulin Secretion
Human islets (500 IEQ, Prodo Laboratories) or differentiated PH or SC-b cells
(5 3 105 cells between 28 and 35 days of differentiation) were sampled. Clus-
ters were washed with Krebs (Krb) buffer and were then preincubated in low
(2 mM) glucose Krb for 2 hr to remove residual insulin. Clusters were washed
two times in Krb, incubated in low-glucose Krb for 30 min, and supernatant
collected. Then clusters were washed two times in Krb, incubated in high
glucose Krb for 30 min, and supernatant collected. This sequence was
repeated two additional times. Finally, clusters were incubated in Krb contain-
ing 2 mM glucose and 30 mM KCl (depolarization challenge) for 30 min and
then supernatant collected. Clusters were then dispersed into single cells us-
ing TrypLE Express (Life Technologies), and cell number was counted auto-
matically by a Vi-Cell (Beckman Coulter). Supernatant samples containing
secreted insulin were processed using the Human Ultrasensitive Insulin ELISA
(ALPCO Diagnostics).
Proinsulin and Insulin Content Measurements
Acid-ethanol extraction was used to extract protein, and proinsulin and insulin
contact was measured using intact human proinsulin (BioVendor) and human
Ultrasensitive Insulin ELISA kits.
Calcium Imaging
Clusters were attached to plates coated with hESC-qualiﬁed Matrigel (BD Bio-
sciences). After incubation and attachment, the wells were washed with Krb
buffer, incubated with Fluo4-AM (Life Technologies) for 45 min, washed with
Krb buffer, and then incubated further in 37C incubator for an additional
15 min without the dye. Clusters were then immediately staged on an Axio-
Zoom V16 microscope (Carl Zeiss) for acquisition of high-resolution time series
imaging.
Time series images were acquired at single-cell resolution of 803 magniﬁca-
tion, every 17 s. Progression of glucose challenges and time of the stimulation
during imaging was as follows: 5 min in low (2 mM) glucose Krb, wash, 5 min
high (20 mM) glucose Krb, and wash. This sequential treatment was repeated
two more times, and then a ﬁnal 5 min incubation 2 mM glucose Krb containing
30 mM KCl was performed. Images were analyzed using ImageJ /Fiji. Analysis
of the cluster was done by the measurement of the average ﬂuorescence
intensity of the whole cluster (population analysis) or average ﬂuorescence in-
tensity of the individual cells within the cluster (single cell analysis).
Immunohistochemistry
Differentiated cell clusters or islets were ﬁxed with 4% PFA for 1 hr at room
temperature (RT), washed, embedded in Histogel (Thermo), and sectioned
for histological analysis. Before staining, parafﬁn was removed from sections
using Histoclear (Thermoscientiﬁc), rehydrated, and underwent antigen
retrieval by treatment with 0.1M EDTA (Ambion) in pressure cooker (Proteoge-
nix) for 2 hr. For staining, slides were blocked with PBS+0.1% Triton X-100
(VWR)+5% donkey serum (Jackson Immunoresearch) for 1 hr at RT, incubated
with primary antibodies overnight at 4C, washed, incubated with secondary
antibody incubation for 2 hr at RT, and washed. For imaging, samples were
mounted in Vectashield (Vector Laboratories), covered with coverslips, and
sealed with nail polish. Representative images were taken using an Olympus
IX51 Microscope or Zeiss LSM 510 or 710 confocal microscope.
Flow Cytometry
Differentiated cell clusters or islets were dispersed into single-cell suspension
by incubation in TrypLE Express at 37C, ﬁxed with 4% PFA on ice for 30 min,
washed once in PBS, and incubated in blocking buffer (PBS+0.1% Triton
X-100+5% donkey serum) on ice for 1 hr. Cells were then resuspended in
blocking buffer with primary antibodies and incubated at 4C overnight. Cells
were washed twice in blocking buffer and were then incubated in blocking
buffer with secondary antibodies on ice for 2 hr. Cells were then washed thrice
and analyzed using the LSR-II ﬂow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Analysis of the
results was performed using FlowJo software.
Gene Expression Analysis of Sorted Cells
To analyze global gene expression of SC-b cells, we used a recently described
ﬁxation and sorting strategy to isolate NKX6-1+/INS+ SC-b cells from the
heterogenous cell clusters (Hrvatin et al., 2014). In brief, dispersed and ﬁxed
cells were incubated with primary antibodies for 30 min in buffer containing
RNasin, washed twice, and then incubated with secondary antibodies in buffer
containing RNasin for 30 min each. After antibody staining, cells were sorted
by ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting. RNA was extracted with the RecoverAll
Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Ambion). The Illumina TotalPrep RNA Ampliﬁ-
cation Kit (Life Technologies) was used to make cRNA, which was run on Hu-
man HT-12 Expression BeadChips (Illumina) using the Whole-Genome
Expression Direct Hybridization kit (Illumina). Chips were scanned on the Illu-
mina Beadstation 500. These SC-b cell microarray data and the previously
published hPSC, PH, fetal b, and adult b cell data (Hrvatin et al., 2014) were im-
ported into the R statistical computing platform using the programming pack-
ages lumi and EMA. Samples were analyzed by hierarchical clustering using
Pearson’s correlation and Ward linkage. The pattern of clustering was robust
to other distance and linkage metrics.
Electron Microscopy
To analyze granular ultrastructure, cadaveric pancreatic islets or differentiated
hPSC were ﬁxed at RT for 2 hr with a mixture containing 1.25% PFA, 2.5%
glutaraldehyde, and 0.03% picric acid in 0.1 M sodium cocodylate buffer
(pH 7.4). Samples were then washed in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer and postﬁxed
at RT with a mixture of 1% OsO4/1.5% KFeCN6 once for 2 hr then once for
1 hr. After washing with water, samples were stained in 1% aqueous uranyl
acetate for 1 hr, washed, and subsequently dehydrated. A 1 hr incubation in
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
437


--- Page 11 ---
propyleneoxide was followed by inﬁltration overnight in a 1:1 mixture of propy-
leneoxide and TAAB Epon (Marivac Canada, St. Laurent, Canada), after which
samples were embedded in TAAB Epon. Cut sections were then stained with
0.2% lead citrate. A JEOL 1200EX Transmission electron microscope or a Tec-
naiG2 Spirit BioTWIN was used to analyze the samples. For determination of
granular protein composition, immunogold labeling was performed on cadav-
eric pancreatic islets or differentiated clusters.
Transplantation Studies
Immunodeﬁcient SCID-Beige mice, aged 8–10 weeks, were procured from Ta-
conic or The Jackson Laboratory, and NOD.Cg-Rag1tm1Mom IL2rgtm1Wjl Ins2A-
kita (NRG-Akita), aged 8–12 weeks, were generously provided by Dr. Leonard
D. Shultz of The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME. Human islets (500–
1000 IEQ per animal for SCID-Beige or 4,000 IEQ per animal for NRG-Akita
mice) or hPSC-derived cell clusters (5 million cells per animal) were loaded
into catheter for cell delivery below the kidney capsule of mice.
At select times, mice were analyzed by performing a glucose challenge,
measuring blood glucose, and collecting serum to measure human insulin. Af-
ter fasting the mice for 16 hr overnight, mice were injected intraperitoneal (IP)
with 2 g D-(+)-glucose/1 kg body weight and blood glucose measured and
serum collected at 0 and 30 min post glucose injection. Serum human insulin
levels were quantiﬁed using the Human Ultrasensitive Insulin ELISA. Kidneys
containing the grafts were dissected from the mice, ﬁxed in 4% PFA overnight,
embedded in parafﬁn, and sectioned for histological analysis. IHC analysis
was performed as described above. All experiments were in accordance
with the guidelines of the appropriate committee.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed by using unpaired and paired t tests. Box
and whisker plots were generated with BoxPlorR (http://boxplot.tyerslab.
com/) using default settings for box and whisker length.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
The GEO accession number for the microarray data reported in this paper is
GSE61714.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, ﬁve
ﬁgures, and three tables and can be found with this article online at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.040.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed to conception and design of experiments. Individual
experimental contributions are as follows: F.W.P., J.R.M., M.G., and M.S.
were primarily responsible for the experiments shown in Figures 1, 3, 5, and
S1–S5 and Tables S1–S3; J.H.R. for Figure 2; A.V.D. for Figure 4; and D.G.
for Figure 6. F.W.P., J.R.M., M.G., and D.A.M. wrote the manuscript. All au-
thors reviewed, edited, and approved the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Chunhui Xie, Eliza Scadden, and Isaac Alter for excellent technical
assistance; Maria Ericsson, Elizabeth Benecchi, and Louise Trakimas from
the HMS Conventional Electron Microscopy Facility for assistance with elec-
tron microscopy; and Dena Cohen, Jeffrey Davis, Adam Roose, Barak Blum,
and the Greiner and BetaLogics laboratories for helpful discussions. We also
thank the members of the Harvard Stem Cell Institute Histology Core and
Flow Cytometry Core facilities for invaluable assistance. The NRG-Akita
mice were generously provided by Dr. Leonard Shultz. J.R.M. was supported
by a fellowship from the Harvard Stem Cell Institute. Q.P.P. was supported by
a fellowship from the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation. D.A.M. is an
Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. This work was supported
by grants from the Harvard Stem Cell Institute, NIH, Helmsley Charitable Trust,
the JPB Foundation and the generosity of M. and A. Barry. D.G. is a consultant
for The Jackson Laboratory.
Received: April 7, 2014
Revised: August 4, 2014
Accepted: September 23, 2014
Published: October 9, 2014
REFERENCES
Aguayo-Mazzucato, C., Zavacki, A.M., Marinelarena, A., Hollister-Lock, J., El
Khattabi, I., Marsili, A., Weir, G.C., Sharma, A., Larsen, P.R., and Bonner-Weir,
S. (2013). Thyroid hormone promotes postnatal rat pancreatic b-cell develop-
ment and glucose-responsive insulin secretion through MAFA. Diabetes 62,
1569–1580.
Apelqvist, A., Li, H., Sommer, L., Beatus, P., Anderson, D.J., Honjo, T., Hrabe
de Angelis, M., Lendahl, U., and Edlund, H. (1999). Notch signalling controls
pancreatic cell differentiation. Nature 400, 877–881.
Bellin, M.D., Barton, F.B., Heitman, A., Harmon, J.V., Kandaswamy, R., Bala-
murugan, A.N., Sutherland, D.E., Alejandro, R., and Hering, B.J. (2012). Potent
induction immunotherapy promotes long-term insulin independence after islet
transplantation in type 1 diabetes. Am. J. Transplant. 12, 1576–1583.
Blum, B., Hrvatin, S.S., Schuetz, C., Bonal, C., Rezania, A., and Melton, D.A.
(2012). Functional beta-cell maturation is marked by an increased glucose
threshold and by expression of urocortin 3. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 261–264.
Brehm, M.A., Bortell, R., Diiorio, P., Leif, J., Laning, J., Cuthbert, A., Yang, C.,
Herlihy, M., Burzenski, L., Gott, B., et al. (2010). Human immune system devel-
opment and rejection of human islet allografts in spontaneously diabetic NOD-
Rag1null IL2rgammanull Ins2Akita mice. Diabetes 59, 2265–2270.
Bruin, J.E., Erener, S., Vela, J., Hu, X., Johnson, J.D., Kurata, H.T., Lynn, F.C.,
Piret, J.M., Asadi, A., Rezania, A., and Kieffer, T.J. (2014). Characterization of
polyhormonal insulin-producing cells derived in vitro from human embryonic
stem cells. Stem Cell Res. (Amst.) 12, 194–208.
Cheng, X., Ying, L., Lu, L., Galva˜ o, A.M., Mills, J.A., Lin, H.C., Kotton, D.N.,
Shen, S.S., Nostro, M.C., Choi, J.K., et al. (2012). Self-renewing endodermal
progenitor lines generated from human pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell
10, 371–384.
Chetty, S., Pagliuca, F.W., Honore, C., Kweudjeu, A., Rezania, A., and Melton,
D.A. (2013). A simple tool to improve pluripotent stem cell differentiation. Nat.
Methods 10, 553–556.
D’Amour, K.A., Agulnick, A.D., Eliazer, S., Kelly, O.G., Kroon, E., and Baetge,
E.E. (2005). Efﬁcient differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to deﬁnitive
endoderm. Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1534–1541.
D’Amour, K.A., Bang, A.G., Eliazer, S., Kelly, O.G., Agulnick, A.D., Smart, N.G.,
Moorman, M.A., Kroon, E., Carpenter, M.K., and Baetge, E.E. (2006). Produc-
tion of pancreatic hormone-expressing endocrine cells from human embryonic
stem cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 24, 1392–1401.
Deconinck, J.F., Potvliege, P.R., and Gepts, W. (1971). The ultrasturcture of
the human pancreatic islets. I. The islets of adults. Diabetologia 7, 266–282.
Ding, Q., Lee, Y.-K., Schaefer, E.A., Peters, D.T., Veres, A., Kim, K., Kuper-
wasser, N., Motola, D.L., Meissner, T.B., Hendriks, W.T., et al. (2013). A TALEN
genome-editing system for generating human stem cell-based disease
models. Cell Stem Cell 12, 238–251.
Fujita, Y., Takita, M., Shimoda, M., Itoh, T., Sugimoto, K., Noguchi, H., Nazir-
uddin, B., Levy, M.F., and Matsumoto, S. (2011). Large human islets secrete
less insulin per islet equivalent than smaller islets in vitro. Islets 3, 1–5.
Gamer, L.W., and Wright, C.V. (1995). Autonomous endodermal determination
in Xenopus: regulation of expression of the pancreatic gene XlHbox 8. Dev.
Biol. 171, 240–251.
Hebrok, M., Kim, S.K., St Jacques, B., McMahon, A.P., and Melton, D.A.
(2000). Regulation of pancreas development by hedgehog signaling. Develop-
ment 127, 4905–4913.
Henry, G.L., and Melton, D.A. (1998). Mixer, a homeobox gene required for
endoderm development. Science 281, 91–96.
438
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 12 ---
Hrvatin, S., O’Donnell, C.W., Deng, F., Millman, J.R., Pagliuca, F.W., DiIorio,
P., Rezania, A., Gifford, D.K., and Melton, D.A. (2014). Differentiated human
stem cells resemble fetal, not adult, b cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111,
3038–3043.
Keirstead, H.S., Nistor, G., Bernal, G., Totoiu, M., Cloutier, F., Sharp, K., and
Steward, O. (2005). Human embryonic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte pro-
genitor cell transplants remyelinate and restore locomotion after spinal cord
injury. J. Neurosci. 25, 4694–4705.
Kim, S.K., Hebrok, M., Li, E., Oh, S.P., Schrewe, H., Harmon, E.B., Lee, J.S.,
and Melton, D.A. (2000). Activin receptor patterning of foregut organogenesis.
Genes Dev. 14, 1866–1871.
Kriks, S., Shim, J.-W., Piao, J., Ganat, Y.M., Wakeman, D.R., Xie, Z., Carrillo-
Reid, L., Auyeung, G., Antonacci, C., Buch, A., et al. (2011). Dopamine neurons
derived from human ES cells efﬁciently engraft in animal models of Parkinson’s
disease. Nature 480, 547–551.
Kroon, E., Martinson, L.A., Kadoya, K., Bang, A.G., Kelly, O.G., Eliazer, S.,
Young, H., Richardson, M., Smart, N.G., Cunningham, J., et al. (2008). Pancre-
atic endoderm derived from human embryonic stem cells generates glucose-
responsive insulin-secreting cells in vivo. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 443–452.
Lammert, E., Cleaver, O., and Melton, D. (2001). Induction of pancreatic differ-
entiation by signals from blood vessels. Science 294, 564–567.
Like, A.A., and Orci, L. (1972). Embryogenesis of the human pancreatic islets: a
light and electron microscopic study. Diabetes Suppl. 21, 511–534.
Lu, B., Malcuit, C., Wang, S., Girman, S., Francis, P., Lemieux, L., Lanza, R.,
and Lund, R. (2009). Long-term safety and function of RPE from human embry-
onic stem cells in preclinical models of macular degeneration. Stem Cells 27,
2126–2135.
McCall, M., and Shapiro, A.M.J. (2012). Update on islet transplantation. Cold
Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2, a007823.
Mohammed, J.S., Wang, Y., Harvat, T.A., Oberholzer, J., and Eddington, D.T.
(2009). Microﬂuidic device for multimodal characterization of pancreatic islets.
Lab Chip 9, 97–106.
Murtaugh, L.C., Stanger, B.Z., Kwan, K.M., and Melton, D.A. (2003). Notch
signaling controls multiple steps of pancreatic differentiation. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100, 14920–14925.
Narayanan, K., Lim, V.Y., Shen, J., Tan, Z.W., Rajendran, D., Luo, S.C., Gao,
S., Wan, A.C., and Ying, J.Y. (2014). Extracellular matrix-mediated differentia-
tion of human embryonic stem cells: differentiation to insulin-secreting beta
cells. Tissue Eng. Part A 20, 424–433.
Ninomiya, H., Takahashi, S., Tanegashima, K., Yokota, C., and Asashima, M.
(1999). Endoderm differentiation and inductive effect of activin-treated ecto-
derm in Xenopus. Dev. Growth Differ. 41, 391–400.
Nostro, M.C., Sarangi, F., Ogawa, S., Holtzinger, A., Corneo, B., Li, X., Micallef,
S.J., Park, I.H., Basford, C., Wheeler, M.B., et al. (2011). Stage-speciﬁc
signaling through TGFb family members and WNT regulates patterning and
pancreatic speciﬁcation of human pluripotent stem cells. Development 138,
861–871.
Rezania, A., Bruin, J.E., Riedel, M.J., Mojibian, M., Asadi, A., Xu, J., Gauvin, R.,
Narayan, K., Karanu, F., O’Neil, J.J., et al. (2012). Maturation of human embry-
onic stem cell-derived pancreatic progenitors into functional islets capable of
treating pre-existing diabetes in mice. Diabetes 61, 2016–2029.
Rezania, A., Bruin, J.E., Xu, J., Narayan, K., Fox, J.K., O’Neil, J.J., and Kieffer,
T.J. (2013). Enrichment of human embryonic stem cell-derived NKX6.1-ex-
pressing pancreatic progenitor cells accelerates the maturation of insulin-
secreting cells in vivo. Stem Cells 31, 2432–2442.
Rodriguez-Diaz, R., Dando, R., Jacques-Silva, M.C., Fachado, A., Molina, J.,
Abdulreda, M.H., Ricordi, C., Roper, S.D., Berggren, P.O., and Caicedo, A.
(2011). Alpha cells secrete acetylcholine as a non-neuronal paracrine signal
priming beta cell function in humans. Nat. Med. 17, 888–892.
Rutter, G.A., and Hodson, D.J. (2013). Minireview: intraislet regulation of insu-
lin secretion in humans. Mol. Endocrinol. 27, 1984–1995.
Schulz, T.C., Young, H.Y., Agulnick, A.D., Babin, M.J., Baetge, E.E., Bang,
A.G., Bhoumik, A., Cepa, I., Cesario, R.M., Haakmeester, C., et al. (2012). A
scalable system for production of functional pancreatic progenitors from hu-
man embryonic stem cells. PLoS ONE 7, e37004.
Shapiro, A.M., Ricordi, C., Hering, B.J., Auchincloss, H., Lindblad, R., Robert-
son, R.P., Secchi, A., Brendel, M.D., Berney, T., Brennan, D.C., et al. (2006).
International trial of the Edmonton protocol for islet transplantation. N. Engl.
J. Med. 355, 1318–1330.
Shiba, Y., Fernandes, S., Zhu, W.Z., Filice, D., Muskheli, V., Kim, J., Palpant,
N.J., Gantz, J., Moyes, K.W., Reinecke, H., et al. (2012). Human ES-cell-
derived cardiomyocytes electrically couple and suppress arrhythmias in
injured hearts. Nature 489, 322–325.
Sneddon, J.B., Borowiak, M., and Melton, D.A. (2012). Self-renewal of embry-
onic-stem-cell-derived progenitors by organ-matched mesenchyme. Nature
491, 765–768.
Son, E.Y., Ichida, J.K., Wainger, B.J., Toma, J.S., Rafuse, V.F., Woolf, C.J.,
and Eggan, K. (2011). Conversion of mouse and human ﬁbroblasts into func-
tional spinal motor neurons. Cell Stem Cell 9, 205–218.
Takahashi, K., and Yamanaka, S. (2006). Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors. Cell
126, 663–676.
Taylor, B.L., Liu, F.F., and Sander, M. (2013). Nkx6.1 is essential for maintain-
ing the functional state of pancreatic beta cells. Cell Rep. 4, 1262–1275.
Thowfeequ, S., Ralphs, K.L., Yu, W.Y., Slack, J.M., and Tosh, D. (2007). Beta-
cellulin inhibits amylase and glucagon production and promotes beta cell dif-
ferentiation in mouse embryonic pancreas. Diabetologia 50, 1688–1697.
Xie, R., Everett, L.J., Lim, H.W., Patel, N.A., Schug, J., Kroon, E., Kelly, O.G.,
Wang, A., D’Amour, K.A., Robins, A.J., et al. (2013). Dynamic chromatin re-
modeling mediated by polycomb proteins orchestrates pancreatic differentia-
tion of human embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 12, 224–237.
Yoshioka, M., Kayo, T., Ikeda, T., and Koizumi, A. (1997). A novel locus,
Mody4, distal to D7Mit189 on chromosome 7 determines early-onset NIDDM
in nonobese C57BL/6 (Akita) mutant mice. Diabetes 46, 887–894.
Cell 159, 428–439, October 9, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
439
