--- Page 1 ---
Esterolytic Antibodies as Mechanistic and Structural
Models of Hydrolases—A Quantitative Analysis
Ariel B. Lindner1, Se Ho Kim1, Dan G. Schindler1, Zelig Eshhar1 and
Dan S. Tawﬁk2*
1Department of Immunology
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 76100, Israel
2Department of Biological
Chemistry, Weizmann Institute
of Science, Rehovot 76100
Israel
Understanding enzymes quantitatively and mimicking their remarkable
catalytic efﬁciency is a paramount challenge. Here, we applied esterolytic
antibodies (the D-Abs) to dissect and quantify individual elements of
enzymatic catalysis such as transition state (TS) stabilization, nucleophilic
reactivity and conformational changes. Kinetic and mutagenic analysis of
the D-Abs were combined with existing structural evidence to show that
catalysis by the D-Abs is driven primarily by stabilization of the tetra-
hedral oxyanionic intermediate of ester hydrolysis formed by the nucleo-
philic attack of an exogenous (solution) hydroxide anion. The side-chain
of TyrH100d is shown to be the main H-bond donor of the D-Abs
oxyanion hole. The pH-rate and pH-binding proﬁles indicate that the
strength of this H-bond increases dramatically as the neutral substrate
develops
into
the
oxyanionic
TS,
resulting
in
TS
stabilization
of
5–7 kcal/mol, which is comparable to oxyanionic TS stabilization in
serine hydrolases. We show that the rate of the exogenous (intermolecu-
lar) nucleophilic attack can be enhanced by 2000-fold by replacing the
hydroxide nucleophile with peroxide, an a-nucleophile that is much
more reactive than hydroxide. In the presence of peroxide, the rate satu-
rates (kcat
max) at 6 s21. This rate-ceiling appears to be dictated by the rate
of the induced-ﬁt conformational rearrangement leading to the active anti-
body–TS complex. The selective usage of negatively charged exogenous
nucleophiles by the D-Abs led to the identiﬁcation of a positively charged
channel. Imprinted by the negatively-charged TS-analogue against which
these antibodies were elicited, this channel presumably directs the nucleo-
phile to the antibody-bound substrate. Our ﬁndings are discussed in com-
parison with serine esterases and, in particular, with cocaine esterase
(cocE), which possesses a tyrosine based oxyanion hole.
q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
Keywords: catalytic antibodies; a-nucleophile; conformational changes;
oxyanion hole; chemical rescue
*Corresponding author
Introduction
The remarkable catalytic efﬁciency of enzymes is
the outcome of many forces and factors acting in
concert. Separating these factors and quantifying
the contribution of each to the overall rate accelera-
tion of an enzyme is not a simple matter.1 Enzyme
models
and
catalytic
antibodies
in
particular
provide a unique opportunity to examine and
quantify enzymatic forces and mechanisms of
action individually. The ﬁrst and foremost studied
antibody-catalyzed reaction is ester hydrolysis, a
reaction that proceeds via relatively low activation
barriers and a well-deﬁned singular tetrahedral,
oxyanionic
intermediate
(I1
in
Mechanism
I,
Scheme
1).2,3
Antibodies
raised
against
stable
0022-2836/02/$ - see front matter q 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
Present addresses: S. H. Kim, Antibody Engineering
Lab., Central Research Center, Korea Green Cross Corp.,
227, Gugal-Ri, Giheung-Eup, Yongin City, Gyunggi-Do
449-900, Korea; D. G. Schindler, Genzyme Transgenics
Corp., 5, The Mountain Road, Framingham, MA 01701,
USA.
E-mail address of the corresponding author:
tawﬁk@weizmann.ac.il
Abbreviations used: TS, transition state; D-Abs, D2.3
and D2.4 antibodies; AChE, acetylcholinesterase; PBS,
phosphate-buffered saline; TBS, Tris-buffered saline;
BSA, bovine serum albumin; Nu, nucleophile; H-bond,
hydrogen bond.
doi:10.1061/S0022-2836(02)00418-7 available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on
B
w
J. Mol. Biol. (2002) 320, 559–572


--- Page 2 ---
analogues of this intermediate are routinely found
to catalyze the hydrolysis of the corresponding
esters (Figure 1).4 The vast majority of these estero-
lytic antibodies achieve catalysis by oxyanionic TS
stabilization, i.e. by stabilizing the oxyanion I1
intermediate and the TSs leading to and from it.
Here, antibody-catalyzed hydrolysis proceeds via
the same mechanism that prevails in spontaneous
ester hydrolysis, an intermolecular nucleophilic
attack of an exogenous hydroxide anion from sol-
ution (Mechanism I), with the difference being the
stabilization of intermediate I1 and the ﬂanking
TSs at the antibody’s active-site.3,5
In contrast, natural enzymes apply a more com-
plex mechanism, combining a variety of catalytic
forces, including preferential substrate alignment,6
endogenous nucleophiles (i.e. an intramolecular
nucleophilic
attack)
and
general-base
catalysis
(e.g.
for
deprotonation
and
activation
of
the
deacylating water molecule), that complement oxy-
anionic
TS
stabilization.
Unlike
catalytic
anti-
bodies, in serine (or cysteine) hydrolases the
nucleophilic attack is carried out by the alkoxide
(or thiol) moiety of an active-site side-chain as an
integral part (endogenous) of the active site (step
A, Mechanism II). This is followed by a deacylation
step mediated by an hydroxide anion generated in
situ by the base-catalyzed proton elimination of an
active-site water molecule (step B, Mechanism II).7
Mechanism II (Scheme 1), the central theme of
which is the covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate,
involves oxyanionic TSs and intermediates (I2 and
I3) analogous to Mechanism I. The overall rate
accelerations exhibited by esterolytic enzymes are
generally in the range of 106–109, although some
esterases, such as acetylcholinesterase (AChE), can
exhibit rate accelerations that are as high as 1013.6
Natural esterases are therefore much more potent
catalysts than catalytic antibodies that exhibit rate
accelerations in the range of 103–105. At the same
time, the antibodies D2.3 and D2.4 (D-Abs) and
most of the other known esterolytic antibodies
apply a single catalytic force that is TS stabiliz-
ation. In contrast, esterolytic enzymes apply a var-
iety
of
catalytic
forces
that
complement
TS
stabilization.
The above comparison of esterolytic enzymes
versus antibodies raises several basic questions
that are addressed here. (i) How do natural
esterases and esterolytic antibodies compare in
their efﬁciency of applying oxyanion stabilization
to ester hydrolysis? (ii) Can the rate of the anti-
bodies’ intermolecular (exogenous) nucleophilic
attack be enhanced signiﬁcantly; and, can it rival
the rate of the natural esterases? (iii) Is the rate of
antibody catalysis affected by factors other than
the chemistry (i.e. the nucleophilic attack), for
example, by physical events such as conformation-
al changes (as may be the case with many enzymes
including esterases8–13)?
This study makes use of the D-Abs. Raised
against p-nitrobenzyl phosphonate TSA 1b,14 they
catalyze
the
hydrolysis
of
the
corresponding
p-nitrobenzyl- and p-nitrophenyl-esters (2b and
2p, respectively; Figure 1) with rate accelerations
of 104–105 (Table 4) and are amongst the most
potent esterolytic antibodies described to date.15
The crystal structures of the D-Abs in complex
with TSA 2b were solved, implicating two resi-
dues, Tyr100dH and Asn34L, as potential hydro-
gen-bond donors promoting the oxyanionic TS
stabilization.16 The structures did not reveal any
active-site residues that could potentially serve as
endogenous nucleophiles16,17 but direct kinetic evi-
dence supporting Mechanism I has not been
obtained to date. In this study, we analyzed the
Scheme 1.
Figure 1. Structure of the compounds used in this
study. The D-Abs were elicited against TSA 1b. They cat-
alyze the hydrolysis of esters 2 to give carboxylic acid 3
and the respective phenol or alcohol (4). Amides 5 were
applied as non-hydrolysable substrate analogues.
560
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies


--- Page 3 ---
binding and kinetic pH proﬁles of the D-Abs and
followed their activity in the presence of a set of
a-nucleophiles
that
are
far
stronger
than
hydroxide.18 Our results support catalysis of D-
Abs following Mechanism I and are not consistent
with Mechanism II. Kinetic studies, supported by
site-directed
mutagenesis,
ascertain
the
contri-
bution of Tyr100dH to TS stabilization and quan-
tify it. In contrast, Asn34L does not appear to play
a signiﬁcant role in TS stabilization nor in substrate
binding. Using peroxide, we have increased the
efﬁciency of the exogenous nucleophilic attack
(and hence kcat) at neutral pH up to 2000-fold to a
rate (6 s21) that approaches the catalytic efﬁciency
of known natural esterases.19–21
Results
The catalytic mechanism of catalysis of the
D-Abs
The design of TSA 1b, the immunizing hapten
used to elicit the D-Abs, suggests that their mech-
anism should follow Mechanism I, whereby the
negatively
charged
tetrahedral
intermediate
formed by the attack of a solution hydroxide
anion (I1 in Mechanism I, Scheme 1) is stabilized
by the antibodies’ active-sites.5 Nevertheless, sev-
eral antibodies raised against TSAs similar to 1b
were shown to follow Mechanism II.22,23 We there-
fore sought kinetic and other evidence that would
conﬁrm the mechanism of the D-Abs.
pH-rate proﬁles
The rate of the antibody-catalyzed ester hydroly-
sis in the pH range of 7–10.5 exhibits a linear
phase (with a slope of 1) followed by an acid limb,
reaching a plateau with an apparent kinetic pKa
7
of 9.0 (Figure 2). Mechanism I is consistent with
the observed proﬁle, whereby the antibody-cata-
lyzed reaction is dependent on: (i) the concen-
tration of hydroxide anions ([OH2]). Speciﬁcally,
as the studied pH range is much lower than the
pKa
of
hydroxide,
log [OH2]
is
directly
pro-
portional to pH and hence results in a linear
phase. (ii) An antibody active-site residue with an
apparent pKa of 9.0, which, in its protonated state
([AbH]), is essential for substrate binding and cata-
lysis, thus giving rise to the acid limb at pH . 9.
Indeed, the data in Figure 2 ﬁt a rate equation of
the form: Rate / [OH2][AbH] (see Materials and
Methods, equation (2)).
It should be noted that pH proﬁles similar to
those shown in Figure 2 have been observed with
other esterolytic antibodies. These were interpreted
to implicate tyrosyl residues as the endogenous
nucleophile
in
Mechanism
II,
although
little
additional evidence was provided.24–26 In the case
of the D-Abs, analysis of the kinetic parameters at
different pH values generally supports Mechanism
I (Figure 2, inset). As the pH increases so does kcat.
This is in accordance with an increased hydroxide
nucleophile concentration leading to a higher rate
of formation of intermediate I1 and a higher rate of
hydrolysis.27 Unfortunately, this
analysis is of
restricted scope, as the very fast spontaneous rate
of hydrolysis of ester 2p prevented the determi-
nation of the discrete kinetic parameters (kcat and
KM) at pH values above 9.5. Nevertheless, the pH-
binding proﬁles of substrate analogues performed
over a wide pH range (7–11.5; see below) indicate
Figure 2. pH proﬁle of the catalytic activity of the D-
Abs. Rate of hydrolysis of ester 2p was measured at
different pH values with antibody D2.3 (A) and D2.4
(X), or, with antibody D2.4 in presence of 0.1 mM per-
oxide (W). The pKa value was derived from the plotted
ﬁt to equation (2) (see Experimental). Inset: kinetic par-
ameters for antibody D2.4 at different pH values. Con-
sistent
with
the
pH-binding
proﬁle
(Figure
3),
at
pH $ 10.5, a decrease of the net antibody-catalyzed
rates was observed though its quantiﬁcation was imprac-
tical due to high background hydrolysis rates. Similarly,
a full pH scale analysis of kcat and KM was unattainable
at
pH . 9.5
due
to
high
background
at
high
2p
concentrations.
Figure 3. pH proﬁle of antibody D2.4 binding activity.
Binding of D2.4 to TSA 1b (X) and 1p (W) and substrate
analogues 5b (A) and 5p (B) was determined at various
pH values by ELISA titration using the BSA-conjugates
of these compounds. Apparent pKa values were deduced
from the pH giving 50% of the maximal binding titer
observed at pH # 9.
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies
561


--- Page 4 ---
that substrate binding (KS) is indeed diminished
above pH 9.0. Together, our data suggest that
deprotonation of an antibody residue reduces sub-
strate binding.
pH bonding proﬁles
Previously,
we
demonstrated
the
similarity
between KM and KS as measured with the D-Abs
in competitive hydrolysis assays between the 2p
and 2b substrates (see Figure 4 of Tawﬁk et al.15).
Direct binding measurements with non-hydrolysa-
ble substrate analogues 5b and 5p show that sub-
strate
binding
is
dependent
on
a
protonated
antibody residue with a pKa of about 9.0 (Figure
3). Notably, binding of TSAs 1p and 1b follows a
similar regime yet exhibits higher apparent pKa
values. The order of pKa values correlates quite
well with the relative afﬁnities by which these
compounds bind the D-Abs (Table 1). The bind-
ing-pH proﬁles suggest that, due to a decrease in
substrate binding, D-Abs catalysis would diminish
at high pH values (Figure 3, 5b and 5p proﬁles).
This is indeed reﬂected in the increase of KM values
at high pH (Figure 2, inset). Furthermore, at
pH $ 10.5, a decrease from the plateau of initial
velocities (Figure 2) was observed, although the
very fast rate of spontaneous hydrolysis of ester
2p prevented its quantiﬁcation.
The differences between the TSA (1b or 1p) and
the substrate analogues (5b or 5p) are the conﬁgur-
ation of the reaction core (the substrate’s carbonyl
group is planar as opposed to the tetrahedral phos-
phonate TSA) and the presence of the phosphona-
te’s
negatively
charged
oxyanion.28
The
nucleophilic attack on the ester substrate to give
intermediate I1 leads to a similar change. We
suggest that in both cases, the added negative
charge leads to a stronger H-bond that is apparent
in the increased apparent pKa of the active-site resi-
dues acting as donors in this interaction.
Effect of peroxide on reaction rates
The effect of peroxide anion, an a-nucleophile
that has a charge similar to that of hydroxide, yet
is far more reactive, is in agreement with Mechan-
ism I. First, as is observed with hydroxide, the
increase in rate of the antibody-catalyzed reaction
largely mirrors the increase observed with per-
oxide in solution in the absence of antibody (Figure
5(a) and (b)). Second, the pH-rate proﬁle in the pre-
sence of peroxide parallels that observed with
hydroxide (Figure 2). This supports the conclusion
that the peroxide anion (O2H2) rather than its
neutral form serves as the active nucleophile. As
is the case with hydroxide, the concentration of
the
anionic
nucleophilic
form
(log [O2H2])
increases linearly at the pH range studied, which
is well under the pKa of peroxide (11.6). This gives
rise to the linear phase of the pH-rate proﬁle
(Figure 2). Moreover, the same apparent pKa is
observed with both hydroxide and peroxide, sup-
porting our conclusion that the pH proﬁles reﬂect
the deprotonation of an active-site residue and are
not dependent on the nature of the nucleophile.
The possibility that product-release becomes rate-
limiting at high pH values and is thus responsible
for the rate-plateau observed at pH . 10 (Figure
2), is ruled out, as the plateau rates in presence of
peroxide
are
consistently
higher
than
those
observed for the hydroxide-mediated hydrolysis.
The
rate
increase
of
the
antibody-catalyzed
hydrolysis in the presence of a stronger nucleo-
phile (peroxide) indicates that the nucleophilic
attack by the exogenous hydroxide, leading to the
I1 intermediate, is rate-limiting. Arguably, this
rate-limiting step could correspond to the deacyla-
tion step of Mechanism II (Step B, Scheme 1),
which could be catalyzed by exogenous hydroxide
anions. In such a case, however, an initial burst of
product release should be observed, corresponding
to
the
fast
accumulation
of
the
acyl-enzyme
intermediate.7 Such bursts are indeed observed in
esterases and amidases that apply Mechanism II
and, in particular, with p-nitrophenyl esters, for
which acylation is very fast and deacylation is
Table 1. The complexes of D2.3 with various ligands:
afﬁnity constants versus pKa
Ligand
Ka (M21)a
pKa
1b
5 £ 108
11.0
1p
5 £ 107
10.0
5b
105
9.1
5p
1.25 £ 104
9.3
a Association constants were taken from Lindner et al.30 and
pKa values from Figure 3 (this work).
Figure 4. Rate of product release by antibody D2.4.
Hydrolysis of ester 2p (0.25 mM) in the presence of
0.2 mM antibody D2.4 was measured in TBS (pH 8.3) by
monitoring the release of the p-nitrophenol product (4p)
using a microtiter plate reader (at 0.3–15 minutes).
Inset: hydrolysis of ester 2p (0.05 mM) in the presence
of 1 mM antibody D2.4 was measured in PBS (pH 7.05)
using a stopped-ﬂow apparatus (at 0–20 seconds).
562
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies


--- Page 5 ---
therefore rate-limiting. However, no burst of pro-
duct release is observed with the D-Abs, on either
a second or on a minute time-scale (Figure 4).
Burst kinetics is absent both with peroxide and
with hydroxide, even though the reaction rate
with hydroxide is 60-fold slower. Thus, Mechanism
II is further disproved by the fact that no burst is
observed even when the rate of nucleophilic attack,
and hence the rate of hydrolysis, is considerably
reduced.
Site-directed mutagenesis of TyrH100d
and AsnL34
TyrH100d and AsnL34 were implicated by the
D-Abs crystal structures as H-bond donors to the
TS oxyanion (Figure 8).16 To assess the contribution
of these residues to catalysis by the D-Ab, various
mutants were generated in the framework of a
recombinant Fv fragment consisting of D2.4 vari-
able heavy chain and D2.3 variable light chain29
Mutation of asparagine L34 to glycine had almost
no effect on binding or catalysis, suggesting that
this residue does not contribute signiﬁcantly to the
oxyanion hole of the D-Abs. In contrast, the rela-
tively conserved mutation of tyrosine H100d to
phenylalanine reduced both binding and catalysis
by more than 1000-fold (Table 2). Two other
mutants of TyrH100d exhibited some residual
binding and catalytic activity. Interestingly, these
mutations introduced residues that can serve as
H-bond donors (lysine and serine). These results
conﬁrm the assignment of an H-bond between
TyrH100d and the ester substrate’s carbonylic oxy-
gen atom in the crystal structure of the antibody–
substrate complex16 and suggest that TyrH100d is
the main contributor to the catalytic mechanism of
the D-Abs. The identiﬁcation of TyrH100d is also
consistent with the pH proﬁling results. Although
the pKa of the hydroxyl group of tyrosine is nor-
mally around 10, the apparently reduced pKa
observed here (9.0) may be due to our inability to
measure the pKa of TyrH100d directly (our results
are limited to a kinetic pKa at a single substrate
concentration (Figure 2) or refer to the antibody–
substrate analogue complex (Figure 3)). It is poss-
ible that, as is often the case, in the active-site
microenvironment, the pKa of TyrH100d is reduced
due to local medium or electrostatic effects.
The D-Abs exhibit selectivity towards
exogenous nucleophiles
Tetrahedral, negatively charged intermediates
can be formed by the attack on the ester’s carbonyl
group by various nucleophiles (I4 in Scheme 2).
Given the similarity in conﬁguration and charge
to I1 (Scheme 1) and the TSA against which the D-
Abs were elicited (Figure 1), these intermediates
and the ﬂanking TSs could be stabilized by the D-
Abs, leading to the accelerated rate of ester 2p clea-
vage (Scheme 2).
We examined small a-nucleophiles that, relative
to their pKa values, are considerably more reactive
than hydroxide (Figure 5, Table 3).18 We found
that, at the D-Ab active sites, the catalytic reaction
proceeds in the presence of peroxide as efﬁciently
as with hydroxide (Figure 5(a) and (b)). Peroxide
is a much better nucleophile than hydroxide and,
unlike
hydroxide,
its
concentration
can
be
increased without raising the pH. Consequently,
the antibody-catalyzed rates (kcat) are signiﬁcantly
faster than with hydroxide. However, as the effect
of peroxide on the antibody-catalyzed and on the
uncatalyzed background reaction is essentially the
same, the rate accelerations (kcat/kuncat) of the D-
Abs with hydroxide or peroxide are similar (15%
higher
and
55%
lower
for
D2.4
and
D2.3,
respectively; Table 3). This is not the case with
hydrazine, hydroxylamine or azide. These nucleo-
philes exhibit a much lower rate (if any) in the pre-
sence of the D-Abs, while in solution, they react
with ester 2p at considerable rates. So much so,
that in the presence of D2.3 no cleavage of ester
2p is observed (beyond the basal reaction observed
in buffer) with hydrazine or hydroxylamine at con-
centrations up to 104-fold higher than hydroxide
(Figure 5(c) and (d); Table 3). The D-Abs exhibit
no reduction in activity after prolonged incubation
Table 2. Contribution of oxyanion hole residues to D-Ab binding and catalysis
Fv antibody fragment
Catalysis (% of wild-type)a
TSA 1p binding (% of wild-type)b
Wild-type
100
100
AsnL34 ! Gly
115 ^ 5
65 ^ 7
TyrH100d ! Phe
,0.1
,0.1
TyrH100d ! Gly
,0.1
,0.1
TyrH100d ! Lys
,0.1
4 ^ 1
TyrH100d ! Ser
8 ^ 2
4 ^ 1
a Activities for wild-type and the AsnL34 ! Gly mutant were obtained from the kcat values for ester 2p. Catalytic activity of the
TyrH100d was determined by catELISA as their activity was too low to be detected with the soluble substrate.
b Binding of 1p TSA was determined by ELISA using 1p conjugated to BSA.
Scheme 2.
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies
563


--- Page 6 ---
with these nucleophiles at the concentration range
studied (0–100 mM) as judged by ELISA binding
tests to substrate analogue 5p and TSA 1b. Thus,
the lack of activity of the D-Abs with hydroxyla-
mine, hydrazine or azide is not due to inactivation
or
inhibition
of
the
antibodies.
Rather,
these
nucleophiles fail to react with ester 2p when placed
at the D-Abs active sites. We ascribe the preference
towards negatively charged nucleophiles (hydrox-
ide and peroxide) to a positively charged tunnel
we have identiﬁed that leads to the active site of
the D-Abs. We propose that this channel directs
the attacking nucleophile to the ester substrate
(see Discussion and Figure 7).
Saturation of the peroxide-assisted D-Abs rates
The ability of the D-Abs to utilize peroxide pro-
vides a unique opportunity to examine how the
rate of the antibody-catalyzed hydrolysis changes
when the efﬁciency of the nucleophilic attack is
enhanced by several orders of magnitude. Using a
stopped-ﬂow apparatus, the rate of product release
was measured at increasing concentrations of per-
oxide. Saturation kinetics was observed with a
similar plateau level for both antibodies at kcat
max
of 6 s21 (Figure 6). This pattern led us to examine
whether the observed kinetics obey the Michae-
lis–Menten model with respect to an antibody–
peroxide complex. The data show systematic devi-
ations from this model. Moreover, the apparent
KMO2H2 obtained from these poor ﬁts (1 mM for
D2.4 and 3.5 mM for D2.3; Figure 6) represents an
unreasonably high afﬁnity to the peroxide anion
(compared to the substrate analogues (5; Table 1)
or to the ester substrates: KM2p ¼ 33 mM for D2.3;
KM2p ¼ 23 mM for D2.4). In theory, the observed
peroxide-mediated rate ceiling could also reﬂect a
two-step mechanism (Mechanism II), whereby a
very fast acylation step is followed by a rate-limit-
ing, hydroxide-mediated deacylation. At high con-
centrations
of
peroxide,
when
the
rate
of
deacylation is greatly enhanced, the rate of acyla-
tion could become limiting, thus giving rise to the
6 s21 rate ceiling. This scenario, however, would
be expected to yield a single-turnover burst of
Figure 5. The effect of different
exogenous
nucleophiles
on
2p
hydrolysis. Hydrolysis of ester 2p
was followed in buffer (with no
antibody; A) or in the presence of
antibody D2.3 (X) or D2.4 (W).
Rate-acceleration factors are the
ratios of net initial rates observed
in the presence of the nucleophile
at a given concentration and in its
absence.
Nucleophile
concen-
trations are given for their active,
deprotonated
form
(note
the
different concentration ranges of
each nucleophile).
Table 3. The reactivity of exogenous nucleophiles
Nucleophilea
pKa
Buffer ( £ 106 M21)b
Antibody D2.3 ( £ 106 M21)b
Antibody D2.4 ( £ 106 M21)b
OH2
15.4
13
12
14
O2H2
11.6
2800
1270
3200
NH2NH2
8.1
0.24
0
0.008
NH2OH
6.0
0.45
0
0.006
N3
2
4.0
1 £ 1023
n.d.
0.01 £ 1023
a A linear correlation links the nucleophilicity of most nucleophiles to their pKa values. However, the reactivity of the a-nucleo-
philes cited above (i.e. excluding OH2) is far higher than predicted from their pKa values (e.g. 103-fold for hydroxylamine).18
b Results are given in molar reactivity, the rate acceleration factor at 1 M nucleophile as extrapolated from Figure 5. n.d., not
determined.
564
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies


--- Page 7 ---
product release when the rate of acylation is rate-
limiting (i.e. with hydroxide as the nucleophile).
However, such a burst is not observed with the
D-Abs (Figure 4). An alternative explanation is
based on our previous observation of rate-limiting
conformational changes in the course of TSA bind-
ing to the D-Abs. The rate of these induced-ﬁt iso-
merisations is essentially identical with the rate
ceiling observed here with peroxide (6 s21; Lindner
et al.30). The possibility that a conformational
change dictates the rate-ceiling of the D-Abs is
further discussed below.
Discussion
This study aims at deciphering the catalytic
mechanism of the D-Abs and quantifying the con-
tribution of various elements of the mechanism to
their rate acceleration. A comparison is then made
between the contributions of the same element to
catalysis by natural esterases.
TS stabilization by the D-Abs
Mechanism I emerges as the simplest mechan-
ism that is in agreement with the kinetic data, the
results of site-directed mutagenesis and the struc-
tural analysis of the D-Abs. Our results also
suggest that the oxyanion hole of the D-Abs is the
major source for their catalytic power. The oxya-
nion hole is dependent on the protonated form of
TyrH100d active-site residue with an apparent
pKa ¼ 9–11 depending on the complexed ligand
and the nature of the analysis (Figures 2 and 3).
TyrH100d is positioned in a favorable orientation
within H-bond distance (2.8 A˚ ) from the TSA’s
phosphonate group (Figure 8), a theme shared
with other esterolytic antibodies.5 The structure of
the D-Abs in complex with substrate-analogue 5b
indicates that the same tyrosyl residue is critical
for both TSA and substrate recognition,17 forming
an H-bond with the substrate analogue scissile car-
bonyl oxygen atom (at a distance of 2.6 A˚ ). In con-
trast, Asn34L, which was previously implicated
with the oxyanion of the D-Abs,16 appears to play
a minor role, if any, in substrate binding and TS
stabilization (Table 2). This may be reﬂected in the
structure
of
the
substrate–antibody
complex
(1YEF in PDB) as 3.8 A˚ separate the aspargine’s d-
amide proton donor and the scissile bond carbonyl
oxygen atom (compared to 2.6 A˚ distance from the
oxygen
atom
of
TyrH100d).
The
pH-binding
Figure 6. The effect of peroxide on catalysis by the D-
Abs. Using a stopped-ﬂow apparatus, the release of p-
nitrophenolate product 4p was measured at increasing
peroxide concentrations in the presence of D2.3 (W) and
D2.4 (X). The net antibody-catalyzed rates (n0) were
used to determine kcat (see Experimental). The hatched-
line represents an attempt to ﬁt the data to the Michae-
lis–Menten model whereby:
kmax
cat ¼ kcat½O2H2o=ð½O2H2o þ KM
O2H2Þ:
Figure 7. Surface charge of antibody D2.3 in complex with substrate analogue 5b. The surface was calculated using
the 2.00 A˚ resolution 1YEF PDB structure,17 treating the antibody and 5b as a single body. Surface charge was calcu-
lated using Delphi57 and Insight II software (Accelrys). The active-site view is taken from the direction of substrate
entry.17 The outermost atom of 5p is marked in green; the rest of it is either buried or comprises part of the surface.
The assumed site of the nucleophilic attack (the ester’s carbonyl group) lies at the very bottom of this channel and is
marked in yellow. (a) The channel leading the nucleophile entry into the active site is threaded with structured water
molecules (light blue spheres). (b) The channel shown in (a), excluding the water molecules.
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies
565


--- Page 8 ---
proﬁles reveal a 1.6–1.9 unit difference in pKa
between the substrate–antibody and the TSA–
antibody complexes (Figure 3 and Table 1). Thus,
the
negative
charge
marking
the
difference
between the substrate and the TSA (and hence the
actual TSs of the reaction) strengthens the tyrosyl-
oxyanion H-bond dramatically, thus rendering it
the key residue in the D-Abs’ oxyanion hole.
Nucleophile discrimination and channeling
As the rates of the D-Abs are normally limited
by the hydroxide nucleophilic attack, the anti-
body-catalyzed
rate
could,
in
principle,
be
improved by applying more effective nucleophiles.
Of a variety of a-nucleophiles that enhance the rate
of ester hydrolysis in solution (Figure 5, Table 3),18
the D-Ab active sites make use of the oxyanionic
peroxide
only.
Other
nucleophiles,
hydrazine,
hydroxylamine and azide, are largely, or even com-
pletely, inactive (Figure 5). The nucleophile dis-
crimination
appears
to
be
yet
another
manifestation of the ability to tailor the speciﬁcity
of action of catalytic antibodies. Its origins seem to
be in the way the D-Ab combining sites were
selected to recognize the negatively charged TSA.-
When bound to the D-Ab active site, the TSA’s
phophonate oxyanions are within H-bonding dis-
tances and angles from TyrH100d and AsnL34,
(the proS oxygen atom, O1) (Figure 8(a)), or Trp
H95 (the proR oxygen atom, O2). The structure of
D2.3 with substrate-analogue 5b indicates that the
substrate’s carbonyl oxygen atom overlaps the
position of O1, while the O2 position remains
unoccupied and is linked by a water-threaded
channel leading to the antibody’s surface, perpen-
dicular to the substrate entry site. The structured
water molecules were suggested to delineate the
path of hydroxide nucleophile entry into the active
site (Figure 7(a)).17 Our analysis suggests that the
strong bias towards oxyanionic nucleophiles may
result from the surface electrostatics of the active-
site water-threaded channel. We ﬁnd that, owing
to the presence of the heavy-chain germline resi-
dues HisH35, ArgH50, and ArgH94, this channel
is highly positively charged (Figure 7(b)). This is
probably the result of these antibodies being
elicited against the negatively charged TSA 1b.31
Notably, the D-Abs were selected out of hundreds
of other TSA-binding antibodies that had lower or
no catalytic activity.14 The positively charged chan-
nel may be part of the selected catalytic machinery
in steering and facilitating the entry of the nega-
tively charged nucleophile into the active site. To
establish this link, we analyzed the sequence of 20
catalytic antibodies raised against TSA 1b in three
different mouse strains (Balb/c, NOD and SJL)
(our
unpublished
results).
The
abundance
of
HisH35 (80%) and ArgH94 (80%) are in agreement
with their appearance in the known mouse heavy-
chain variable (VH) region,32 50% and 80%, respect-
ively. In contrast, the high abundance of ArgH50
(65%) in our sequenced antibodies (regardless of
their germline origin) is distinctive compared to
its
10%
abundance
in
all
known
mouse
VH
sequences. The ArgH50 guanidinium moiety is
exposed to the D-Abs active site, and is located
5.5 A˚ away from the substrate analogue scissile
bond carbonyl group, within hydrogen bond dis-
tance (2.9 A˚ ) from the water molecule closest to
the same substrate carbonyl group (4.0 A˚ ). Thus,
ArgH50 may have been selected in direct response
to the negatively charged hapten 1b and by the
direct screening for catalytic activity.14 Further, in
order to reach the ester substrate and attack it, the
nucleophile needs to displace the structured water
molecules residing in the channel. Nucleophile dis-
crimination could therefore stem from favorable
electrostatic
interactions
between
the
anionic
nucleophiles and the positive channel that com-
pensate for the considerable energy loss involved
in displacing these structured water molecules.
It should also be noted that the high reactivity of
hydroxylamine towards esters such as p-nitrophe-
nyl acetate is primarily due to its zwitterionic
form. In this conﬁguration, the nucleophile is the
oxyanion and the protonated amine H-bonds to
the TS’s oxyanion (Scheme 3).33 The tightly packed
active site of the D-Abs may disfavor this spatially
demanding conﬁguration. Hydrazine may follow
a similar mechanism, yet the equivalence of its
two amine groups makes them indistinguishable.
The azide nucleophile (N3
2), due to its long and
rigid rod-like shape, may not ﬁt into the active site
in the orientation required for the nucleophilic
attack. In addition, although carrying an overall
negative charge, its charge distribution (similar to
that of hydroxylamine) includes a positive charge
that might hinder its entrance through the narrow,
positively charged channel.
Finally, the observed nucleophile discrimination
calls for caution in the mechanistic interpretation
of the effect of exogenous nucleophiles. Similar
complexities
were
described
for
an
enzyme
model.34 Speciﬁcally, as shown here, the lack of
rate acceleration with a particular nucleophile26,35
may not necessarily indicate that an exogenous
hydroxide nucleophile does not take part in the
rate-limiting step.
The rate-ceiling of the D-Abs
We have addressed the question of whether the
contribution of the exogenous (intermolecular)
nucleophilic attack is additive to the contribution
of the oxyanion stabilization by supplementing
the D-Abs with highly reactive a-nucleophiles.
Scheme 3.
566
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies


--- Page 9 ---
Our approach is analogous to the study of natural
enzymes in which an endogenous catalytic residue
is removed by site-directed mutagenesis. The cata-
lytic activity of the mutants can often be restored
with a soluble catalytic group that resembles the
truncated active-site residue to rates only 100–
300-fold lower than that of the intact enzyme.36–38
The selectivity of the D-Abs towards oxyanionic
nucleophiles and the high nucleophilicity of per-
oxide enabled this approach. The rates of the D-
Abs increase with the addition of peroxide but
reach saturation at kcatmax ¼ 6ð^1Þ s21 (compared
with kcatðD2:3Þ ¼ 0:003 s21 and kcatðD2:4Þ ¼ 0:012 s21
in the absence of peroxide at the same neutral pH;
Figure 6). Previously, we measured the rates of
conformational
isomerisations
of
the
D-Abs
induced by binding of TSA 1b or 1p by stopped-
ﬂow ﬂuorescence quenching. These experiments
indicated an induced-ﬁt mechanism whereby an
initial low-afﬁnity encounter complex isomerises
to give a 60-fold higher afﬁnity complex. This iso-
merisation is governed by an apparent rate of
6 s21 (Lindner et al.30), a rate constant that is essen-
tially identical with the rate observed in the per-
oxide-catalyzed hydrolysis at saturation. Thus,
unless this identity of rates is haphazard, the
observed kcat
max of 6 s21 (Figure 6) may suggest
that a similar isomerisation follows substrate bind-
ing and the formation of TSA-like intermediate I1
(Mechanism I). This places a 6 s21 kinetic barrier
on the catalytic cycle of the D-Abs. This barrier is
not
met
under
ordinary
conditions,
i.e.
with
hydroxide as the exogenous nucleophile, where
the nucleophilic attack is clearly rate-limiting (see
above). With peroxide, however, the rate of nucleo-
philic attack is increased (500 and 2000-fold, with
D2.4 and D2.3, respectively, at neutral pH) and the
conformational isomerisation does become rate-
limiting. This ﬁnding delineates the catalytic role
of the conformational isomerisation of the D-Abs
and conﬁrms the notion that antibody–TSA inter-
actions truly reﬂect the antibodies’ interaction
with the actual TS.30
Comparison of the D-Abs to
esterolytic enzymes
Oxyanion hole and TS stabilization
The speciﬁc free energies for the complexation of
the D-Abs with the TSA (DGTSA
0
2 DGS
0) are almost
identical with the reduction in the activation
energy barrier derived for the D-Abs from their
rate acceleration (DGcat
‡ 2 DGuncat
‡
) (Table 4). This
tight correlation suggests that the active sites of
the D-Abs convert binding energy into catalysis
with ,100% efﬁciency. How do these values com-
pare with the efﬁciency of oxyanion stabilization
in
natural
hydrolases?
Oxyanion
stabilization
mediated, as in the D-Abs, by a tyrosine residue
has been demonstrated recently in the serine-
hydrolase cocaine esterase 1 that applies Mechan-
ism II (cocE; Table 5; Figure 8(b)),21 as well as in a
number of prolyl oligopeptidases.39–41 The tyrosyl
contribution to the mechanism of these peptidases
was assessed by a Tyr-to-Phe mutation exhibiting
up to ,1000-fold ð4:2 kcal=mol : 1 cal ¼ 4:184 JÞ
decrease in kcat.40,41 A similar (or possibly higher)
decrease in activity is observed with the D-Abs
upon mutation of tyrosine H100d to phenylalanine
(Table 2). Thus the contribution of TS stabilization
to the D-Ab catalysis (5.3–7.0 kcal/mol; Table 5)
Table 4. Kinetic constants of ester hydrolysis by D2.3, D2.4 and cocE
Catalyst, substrate
D2.4a, ester 2p
D2.3a, ester 2b
cocE, cocaine
kuncat (s21)
8 £ 1026
5 £ 1027
1.2 £ 1026 b
kcat (s21)
0.22
0.05
7.8c
kcat/kuncat
2.7 £ 104
1.1 £ 105
6.5 £ 106
a Tawﬁk et al.15
b Landry et al.58
c Larsen et al.21
Table 5. Binding energies of the D-Abs and their contribution to catalysis
1b TSA and 2b ester (kcal/mol)
1p TSA and 2p ester (kcal/mol)
Ab
DGTSA
0
2 DGS
0 a
DGcat
‡ 2 DGuncat
‡
b
DGTSA
0
2 DGS
0 a
DGcat
‡ 2 DGuncat
‡
b
D2.3
7.0
7.0
4.5
5.3c
D2.4
6.3
6.3
4.8
6.1c
a Derived from binding association constants for the TSA versus the substrate (KTSA and KS, respectively15) using DG0
TSA 2 DG0
S ¼
2RTðln KTSA=KSÞ:
b Derived from the rate constants at pH 8.3 for the antibody-catalyzed hydrolysis (kcat) versus the rate constant of the unctalyzed
rate of hydrolysis extrapolated to zero-buffer concentration (kuncat)15 using DG‡
cat 2 DG‡
uncat ¼ 2RTðln kcat=kuncatÞ:
c In the case of the p-nitrophenyl pair (TSA 1p and ester substrate 2p), the reduction in activation energy (DGcat
‡ 2 DGuncat
‡
) exceeds
the expected contribution from the relative afﬁnities to the D-Abs (DGTSA
0
2 DGS
0). This suggests that 1p (unlike the immunizing hapten
1b; Figure 1) is not the optimal TS mimic for the antibody-mediated 2p ester hydrolysis as discussed by Tawﬁk et al.15
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies
567


--- Page 10 ---
compares favorably with the enzymatic homolo-
gous oxyanion hole. The estimated value for oxya-
nion hole contribution in other serine hydrolases
(e.g. AChE, 5–7 kcal/mol;6 and subtilisin, 5 kcal/
mol)1 is remarkably similar to the values measured
for the D-Abs even though their oxyanion hole
architecture is very different. The H-bond donors
of AChE are backbone amide groups and those of
subtilisin are both a main-chain amide group and
an asparagine side-chain). Furthermore, the contri-
bution of a single side-chain to oxyanion stabiliz-
ation of hydrolases is distinctly lower than the
contribution of Tyr100d in the D-Abs, as revealed
by mutagenesis; for example: subtilisin N155A, 2–
3 kcal/mol;42,43 papain N19A, ,3 kcal/mol;44 cuti-
nase
Ser42A,
,3 kcal/mol;45
oligopeptidase
B
Y452F, 3–4 kcal/mol;40,41,46 and Escherichia coli sig-
nal peptidase Ser88A, ,4 kcal/mol.47 It appears
therefore that the D-Abs achieve enzyme-like efﬁ-
ciency in applying one fundamental enzymatic fea-
ture, that of the oxyanion hole. They do so with a
chemistry
and
structure
similar
to
that
of
enzymes,21,39–41 indicating the convergent evolution
of oxyanion holes in two completely different bio-
logical systems: on one hand, antibodies that
evolved in a mammalian system to bind a phos-
phonate TSA, and on the other hand, a bacterial
enzyme that evolved to hydrolyze cocaine.48
Contribution of the nucleophilic attack
The esterase cocE exhibits a rate enhancement of
6.5 £ 106.21 This is within the range of most natural
esterases that exhibit rate accelerations (kcat/kuncat)
of 106–109 fold. The D-Abs, however, exhibit ca
100-fold lower accelerations than cocE (Table 4).
The uncatalyzed hydrolysis rates of both the
benzyl ester substrates of the D-Abs and cocE are
comparable (Table 4) and so are their oxyanion
holes (Figure 8). Hence, cocE may serve as an ade-
quate reference to the D-Abs. Given the above
similarities, we propose that the energy gained by
TS stabilization by the D-Abs (Table 5) is compar-
able to the contribution of oxyanionic stabilization
to the rate enhancement of cocE. This ascribes a
contribution of 60–200-fold of rate enhancement
to the cocE rate-limiting deacylation step (step B
in Mechanism II) (for the limiting role of deacyla-
tion in ester hydrolysis by serine hydrolases see7).
Although the rate-ceiling of the D-Abs may be
dictated by an event of a physical nature, a higher
500–2000-fold rate increase was gained by the
addition of the exogenous peroxide nucleophile.
In serine hydrolases, deacylation is catalyzed via
the deprotonation of a resident water molecule to
yield a hydroxide anion (Scheme 1, Mechanism II,
step B). This deprotonation is catalyzed by the
active site His-Asp dyad, which is responsible for
deprotonation and activation of the seryl alkoxide
reactive nucleophile. A direct measurement of the
deacylation
rate
of
acylated
chymotrypsin
by
water gave a rate constant of 77–200 s21. This
value, when divided by 55 M, gave a second-order
rate constant of 1.4–3.6 M21 s21 that is clearly
below the second-order rate calculated for per-
oxide reactivity with the D-Abs, 6 £ 105 M21 s21
(determined from the saturated kcatmax ¼ 6 s21 at
10 mM peroxide anion concentration; Figure 6).7,49
The rate of deacylation of acylated chymotrypsin
is enhanced in the presence of a-nucleophiles
(hydrazine) but the increase is relatively modest
(ca twofold) versus that observed with the D-Abs
and peroxide (500–2000-fold). Moreover, in the
case of chymotrypsin, ordinary amine nucleophiles
Figure 8. The oxyanion holes of antibody D2.3 and cocE. (a) The D2.3 residues implicated in TS stabilization are
deduced from the structure of D2.3 in complex with TSA 1b (1YEC in PDB16); O1 represents the TS oxyanion and O2
represents the putative position of the nucleophile. (b) The oxyanion hole residues of cocE as suggested by its crystal
structure with phenyl boronic acid (1JU3 in PDB21). The side-chain of Tyr44 and the backbone of Tyr118 are depicted
with their hydrogen bonds to the putative TS. O1 represents the TS oxyanion whereas O2 represents the hydroxyl
nucleophile of Ser117 (the Tyr118 side-chain, represented in wireframe, is not involved in TS stabilization).
568
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies


--- Page 11 ---
(not
a-nucleophiles)
exhibit
higher
rates
then
hydrazine. The highest deacylation rate, observed
with tyrosinamide (1.7 £ 104 M21 s21),49 is quite
close to the rate of the D-Abs with peroxide
(6 £ 105 M21 s21). In the former, the high rate
reﬂects the high level of speciﬁcity of chymotryp-
sin for the leaving group (as inferred from the prin-
ciple of microscopic reversibility),49 whilst the
latter results from the increased chemical reactivity
of the peroxide nucleophile and the high comple-
mentarity of the D-Abs to the oxyanionic TS of the
reaction.
The
maximal
rate
obtained
by
the
D-Abs
ðkcatmax ¼ 6 s21Þ is comparable to that of many
esterolytic
enzymes
(e.g.
cocE
(Table
5),
thioesterases20
and
lipases19).
Assuming
that
deacylation is rate-limiting in these enzymes, a
potent exogenous nucleophile at the active site of
the D-Abs can match the rate contribution pro-
vided to deacylation by the general-base His-Asp
dyad in the active site of these enzymes. Nonethe-
less, in addition to the oxyanionic TS stabilization
and the endogenous nucleophilic attacks, other
forces may contribute to the fast rates exhibited by
esterases. AChE, for example, exhibits a rate
acceleration of about 1013. Harel et al. suggested
that the extraordinary proﬁciency of AChE is
derived from perfectly aligning the substrate for
the nucleophilic attack to take place.6 Indeed,
AChE with its kcat of 104 s21 stands out from most
other esterases, which exhibit kcat values in the
range of 1–200 s21.
Conformational changes
The observation and role of conformational
changes in enzymes are often concealed by other
rate-determining steps.7 In the case of AChE, a
rate-limiting induced-ﬁt step was reported with
activated aryl substrates, although its role remains
unclear.8,9 Thioesterase I (Tep-I) represents another
example of a natural hydrolase where confor-
mational ﬂexibility was observed but not assigned
to function.50 For the D-Abs, however, an induced-
ﬁt isomerisation was shown to increase the afﬁnity
towards the TSA by 60-fold.30 The results pre-
sented here indicate that the increase in afﬁnity
towards the TSA may be mirrored in the stabiliz-
ation of the TSs of the esterolytic reaction, hence
linking the observed conformational changes to
the catalytic mechanism of the D-Abs.
On the generation of more potent
esterolytic antibodies
Rivaling the rates of enzyme catalysis, by cataly-
tic antibodies or any other enzyme-mimic, is a
daunting challenge.51 Our results suggest that
enzyme-like rates are achievable with esterolytic
antibodies, provided that the nucleophilic attack
at the antibody active site is made more effective
than in bulk solution. One way pointed out by
this study is to optimize the electrostatic properties
of the channel through which the nucleophile
approaches the active-site, perhaps by engineering
positively-charged residues in and around this
channel without interfering with the properties of
the active-site core.52 Recently, antibodies (regard-
less of their binding speciﬁcity) were found to
mediate
the
conversion
of
singlet
oxygen
to
peroxide.53 It may be possible to elicit antibodies
that channel the in situ generated peroxide directly
into the active site. All these modiﬁcations could,
in principle, be additive to improvements of the
active site itself obtained by increasing the afﬁnity
to the TSA3,54 Although catalysis via a covalent
enzyme-substrate intermediate is not always, or
necessarily, an effective route,7 an alternative way
to faster rates would be via Mechanism II involving
endogenous active-site nucleophiles, as is the case
with most esterolytic enzymes. A few esterolytic
antibodies follow this mechanism22,23 but, as the
hydrolysis of their acyl-antibody intermediate is
catalyzed by the rate-limiting attack of an exogen-
ous hydroxide nucleophile, their rates are compar-
able
to
esterolytic
antibodies
that
apply
Mechanism
I.3
Thus,
in
analogy
to
natural
esterases, introducing a general base to the active
site would be highly beneﬁcial. The catalytic rates
of antibodies appear to be limited by physical
events, such as product release or conformational
isomerism.55 A signiﬁcant enhancement in rate
may therefore require a parallel improvement of
the
catalytic
machinery
and
the
antibody’s
dynamics. Most of the improvements suggested
above are not likely to be achieved by designing
new immunizing haptens or engineering existing
antibodies. Thus, the most general and effective
way of improving potency would be to select ester-
olytic antibodies directly for higher rates and
turnover.30,56 Such direct selections can affect all
the factors concerned: those linked directly with
the active site (e.g. inducing endogenous active-
site nucleophiles) and those peripheral to it (e.g.
improving the approach of exogenous nucleophiles
or the rate of conformational isomerism).
Materials and Methods
Materials
The generation and puriﬁcation of the D-antibodies
and their recombinant Fv fragments as well as synthesis
of transition state analogs and other compounds are
described elsewhere.14,15,29,30 Fv fragment mutagenesis at
positions H100d and L34 was carried out using a Cha-
meleon double-stranded, site-directed mutagenesis kit
(Stratagene, La Jolla, CA).
Kinetics
In light of the high 2p ester background, hydrolysis
rates at basic pH and in the presence of high concen-
trations of a-nucleophiles, initial experiments were car-
ried out to determine the combination of antibody and
substrate concentrations that would allow quantitative
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies
569


--- Page 12 ---
measurements. Ester 2p hydrolysis was monitored by
the
release
of
p-nitrophenolate
(4p)
at
415 nm
as
described.15 All antibody-catalyzed rates are “net”-rates,
i.e. the rates observed in the presence of the antibody
minus the rate observed under the same conditions
with no antibody.
pH dependency
The pH-dependency of ester 2p (50 mM) hydrolysis by
D2.3† (1 mM) and D2.4 (0.6 mM) was determined in
50 mM sodium borate (pH 7–10) or sodium carbonate
(pH 9.5–10.5) buffers with 150 mM NaCl.
The ﬁt of net rates to pH (Figure 2) includes the
nucleophile’s
concentration
as
generally
given
in
equation (1):
½Nu2 ¼ {½Nutotal £ 10ðpH2pKaÞ}={1 þ 10ðpH2pKaÞ} ð1Þ
However, for hydroxide and peroxide, pKa @ pH, and
consequently:
½Nu2 < ½Nutotal £ 10ðpH2pKaNuÞ:
As
[Nu]total
and
10ð2pKaNuÞ are constant, [Nu2]
/
10(pH), and hence,
log [Nu2]
/
pH. This accounts for the linear-phase
observed in Figure 2 during which: log (n0) / [OH2] or
[O2H2].
The antibody deprotonation step is governed by pKa
Ab
and is described by7:
logðn0Þ / ½AbH ¼ ½Abtotal½Hþ=ðKa
Ab þ ½HþÞ
The overall rate equation applied to ﬁt the pH-rate pro-
ﬁles in Figure 2 includes both the nucleophile and the
antibody concentration terms to give:
logðn0Þ ¼ C 2 logð10ð2pKaAbÞ þ 10ð2pHÞÞ
ð2Þ
where C is a constant that incorporates [Nu]total, pKa
Nu
and [Ab]total.
Nucleophile effect on D-Abs catalysis
Ester 2p (75 mM) hydrolysis in the presence of 0–
10 mM azide, hydroxylamine, hydrazine or peroxide
was measured in PBS (pH 7.05) with antibodies D2.3
(1 mM) or D2.4 (0.2 mM). Nucleophile concentrations
were corrected to their unprotonated-active form using
equation
(1).
Stopped-ﬂow
(Applied
Photophysics)
measurements of ester 2p (75 mM) hydrolysis at 405 nm
were performed in PBS (pH 7.05) in the presence of per-
oxide ð½Nutotal ¼ 0–200 mMÞ and 1 mM D-Abs†. Initial
rates measured in volts/second were converted to mM/
second via a p-nitrophenolate calibration curve. Rates
were averaged from four to ten independent samples
and kcat at different concentrations of peroxide was
derived using the Michaelis–Menten model and a KM
value of 23 mM (KM for 2p appears to be unaffected by
peroxide; data not shown).
Binding pH proﬁles
Binding pH proﬁles were determined by ELISA.15
Brieﬂy, plates were coated with 2–10 mg/ml of bovine
serum albumin (BSA)-conjugated anilide 5p, amide 5b,
and phosphonates 1p or 1b. The D-Abs were serially
diluted in the buffers used in the pH-rate proﬁling and
incubated in the plate for one hour. The plates were
rinsed and the amount of bound antibody determined
with peroxidase-labeled goat anti mouse Fab antibodies.
Antibody titer at each pH value was determined by the
antibody dilution leading to 50% binding. This was cor-
related to the maximal activity at the plateau range
(pH , 9) taken as 100%.
Activity of Fv mutants
Competitive ELISA was applied to determine the rela-
tive afﬁnities of the D-Abs Fv fragment mutants to TSA
1p as compared to the binding activity of the wild-type.
The Fvs (diluted in 1% (w/v) skim milk powder in TBS
(pH 8.3) to a concentration giving 50% binding signal
under the same ELISA conditions) were pre-incubated
for one hour with or without serially diluted TSA 1p.
Aliquots of these solutions were then applied for one
hour at room temperature to ELISA plates coated with
0.5 mg/ml of 1p-BSA conjugate15 followed by detection
with anti-E-tag antibody (Pharmacia).29 The concen-
tration of 1p TSA resulting in 50% inhibition (IC50) was
determined for each Fv mutant and correlated to the
IC50 of the wild-type. The kcat and KM values of the
AsnL34 ! Gly,Tyr mutants were determined by Michae-
lis–Menten kinetics as described for the wild-type Fv
fragment29 The poor activity of the AsnL34 ! Gln and
TyrH100d ! Ser,Lys,Phe,Gly mutants were assayed by
titration using catELISA14 where their signals were com-
pared to the wild-type activity.
Acknowledgments
We deeply thank Dr Miriam Eisenstein for the struc-
tural surface-charge calculations. A.B.L. was supported
by EMBO and FEBS short-term fellowships. The ﬁnancial
support of the Henry S. and Anne S. Reich research fund
is gratefully acknowledged.
References
1. Carter, P. & Wells, J. A. (1990). Functional interaction
among catalytic residues in subtilisin BPN’. Proteins:
Struct. Funct. Genet. 7, 335–342.
2. Lerner, R. A., Benkovic, S. J. & Schultz, P. G. (1991).
At the crossroads of chemistry and immunology: cat-
alytic antibodies. Science, 252, 659–667.
3. Hilvert, D. (2000). Critical analysis of antibody cata-
lysis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 751–793.
4. Stevenson, J. D. & Thomas, N. R. (2000). Catalytic
antibodies and other biomimetic catalysts. Nat. Prod.
Rep. 17, 535–577.
5. Tantillo, D. & Houk, K. (2001). Canonical binding
arrays as molecular recognition elements in the
† Slow, minute-scale, substrate-induced
conformational changes generate the higher-active form
of the antibody in a hysteretic manner manifested by a
lag in the kinetics of product release.30 The lag persists in
the pH range studied and in the presence of peroxide,
suggesting that the equilibrium between the two
antibody isomers is unaffected during the time-scale of
these kinetics measurements (less than two minutes).
Thus, our data reﬂect the activity of a mixture between
the higher and nether-active conformers, dominated by
the active isomer.
570
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies


--- Page 13 ---
immune system: tetrahedral anions and the ester
hydrolysis transition state. Chem. Biol. 8, 535–545.
6. Harel, M., Quinn, D. M., Nair, H. K., Silman, I. &
Sussman, J. L. (1996). The X-ray structure of a tran-
sition state analog complex reveals the molecular ori-
gins of the catalytic power and substrate speciﬁcity
of
acetylcholinesterase.
J.
Am.
Chem.
Soc.
118,
2340–2346.
7. Fersht, A. R. (1985). Enzyme Structure and Mechanism,
Freeman, New York.
8. Rosenberry, T. L. (1975). Catalysis by acetylcholin-
esterase: evidence that the rate-limiting step for acy-
lation
with
certain
substrates
precedes
general
acid–base catalysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 72,
3834–3848.
9. Acheson, S. A., Depopoulou, D. & Quinn, D. M.
(1987). Simple general acid–base catalyis and virtual
transition states for acetylcholinesterase-catalysed
hydrolysis of ester substrates. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 109,
239–245.
10. Wang, L., Pang, Y., Holder, T., Brender, J. R., Kuroch-
kin, A. V. & Zuiderweg, E. R. (2001). Functional
dynamics in the active site of the ribonuclease
binase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 7684–7689.
11. Berger, E., Arabshahi, A., Wei, Y., Schilling, J. F. &
Frey, P. A. (2001). Acid–base catalysis by UDP-galac-
tose
4-epimerase:
correlations
of
kinetically
measured acid dissociation constants with thermo-
dynamic values for tyrosine 149. Biochemistry, 40,
6699–6705.
12. Vande Berg, B. J., Beard, W. A. & Wilson, S. H. (2001).
DNA structure and aspartate 276 inﬂuence nucleo-
tide binding to human DNA polymerase beta. Impli-
cation
for
the
identity
of
the
rate-limiting
conformational change. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 3408–3416.
13. Baltzinger, M. & Holler, E. (1982). Kinetics of acyl
transfer ribonucleic acid complexes of Escherichia coli
phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase. A conformational
change is rate limiting in catalysis. Biochemistry, 21,
2460–2467.
14. Tawﬁk, D. S., Green, B. S., Chap, R., Sela, M. & Esh-
har, Z. (1993). catELISA: a facile general route to cat-
alytic antibodies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 90,
373–377.
15. Tawﬁk, D. S., Lindner, A. B., Chap, R., Eshhar, Z. &
Green, B. S. (1997). Efﬁcient and selective p-nitrophe-
nyl-ester-hydrolyzing antibodies elicited by a p-
nitrobenzyl phosphonate hapten. Eur. J. Biochem.
244, 619–626.
16. Charbonnier, J. B., Golinelli, P. B., Gigant, B., Tawﬁk,
D. S., Chap, R., Schindler, D. G. et al. (1997). Struc-
tural convergence in the active sites of a family of
catalytic antibodies. Science, 275, 1140–1142.
17. Gigant, B., Charbonnier, J. B., Eshhar, Z., Green, B. S.
& Knossow, M. (1997). X-ray structures of a hydro-
lytic antibody and of complexes elucidate catalytic
pathway from substrate binding and transition state
stabilization
through
water
attack
and
product
release. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 7857–7861.
18. Jencks, W. P. & Carriuolo, J. (1960). Reactivity of
nucleophilic agents toward esters. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
82, 1778–1786.
19. Stoops, J. K., Horgan, D. J., Runnegar, M. T., De Jer-
sey, J., Webb, E. C. & Zerner, B. (1969). Carboxyles-
terases
(EC
3.1.1).
Kinetic
studies
on
carboxylesterases. Biochemistry, 8, 2026–2033.
20. Lee, Y. L., Chen, J. C. & Shaw, J. F. (1997). The thioes-
terase I of Escherichia coli has arylesterase activity and
shows stereospeciﬁcity for protease substrates. Bio-
chem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 231, 452–456.
21. Larsen, N. A., Turner, J. M., Stevens, J., Rosser, S. J.,
Basran, A., Lerner, R. A. et al. (2002). Crystal struc-
ture of a bacterial cocaine esterase. Nature Struct.
Biol. 9, 17–21.
22. Wirsching, P., Ashley, J. A., Benkovic, S. J., Janda,
K. D. & Lerner, R. A. (1991). An unexpectedly efﬁ-
cient catalytic antibody operating by ping-pong and
induced ﬁt mechanisms. Science, 252, 680–685.
23. Krebs, J. F., Siuzdak, G., Dyson, H. J., Stewart, J. D. &
Benkovic, S. J. (1995). Detection of a catalytic anti-
body species acylated at the active site by electro-
spray mass spectrometry. Biochemistry, 34, 720–723.
24. Martin, M. T., Napper, A. D., Schultz, P. G. & Rees,
A. R. (1991). Mechanistic studies of a tyrosine-depen-
dent catalytic antibody. Biochemistry, 30, 9757–9761.
25. Angeles, T. S., Smith, R. G., Darsley, M. J., Sugasa-
wara, R., Sanchez, R. I., Kenten, J. et al. (1993). Isoab-
zymes:
structurally
and
mechanistically
similar
catalytic antibodies from the same immunization.
Biochemistry, 32, 12128–12135.
26. Gigant, B., Tsumuraya, T., Fujii, I. & Knossow, M.
(1999). Diverse structural solutions to catalysis in a
family of antibodies. Struct. Fold. Des. 7, 1385–1393.
27. Resmini, M., Vigna, R., Simms, C., Barber, N. J.,
Hagi-Pavli, E. P., Watts, A. B. et al. (1997). Character-
ization of the hydrolytic activity of a polyclonal cata-
lytic antibody preparation by pH-dependence and
chemical
modiﬁcation
studies:
evidence
for
the
involvement of Tyr and Arg side chains as hydro-
gen-bond donors. Biochem. J. 326, 279–287.
28. Tantillo, D. J. & Houk, K. N. (1999). Fidelity in hap-
ten design: how analogous are phosphonate haptens
to the transition states for alkaline hydrolyses of
aryl esters? J. Org. Chem. 64, 3066–3076.
29. Kim, S. H., Schindler, D. G., Lindner, A. B., Tawﬁk,
D. S. & Eshhar, Z. (1997). Expression and characteriz-
ation of recombinant single-chain Fv and Fv frag-
ments derived from a set of catalytic antibodies.
Mol. Immunol. 34, 891–906.
30. Lindner, A. B., Eshhar, Z. & Tawﬁk, D. S. (1999). Con-
formational changes affect binding and catalysis by
ester-hydrolysing
antibodies.
J.
Mol.
Biol.
285,
421–430.
31. Sela, M. & Mozes, E. (1966). Dependence of the
chemical nature of antibodies on the net electrical
charge of antigens. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 55,
445–452.
32. Martin, A. C. (1996). Accessing the Kabat antibody
sequence database by computer. Proteins: Struct.
Funct. Genet. 25, 130–133.
33. Jencks, W. P. (1958). The reaction of hydroxylamine
with activated acyl groups. I. Mechanism of the reac-
tion. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 80, 4585–4588.
34. Admiraal, S. J., Meyer, P., Schneider, B., Deville-
Bonne, D., Janin, J. & Herschlag, D. (2001). Chemical
rescue of phosphoryl transfer in a cavity mutant: a
cautionary tale for site-directed mutagenesis. Bio-
chemistry, 40, 403–413.
35. Zhou, G. W., Guo, J., Huang, W., Fletterick, R. J. &
Scanlan, T. S. (1994). Crystal structure of a catalytic
antibody with a serine protease active site. Science,
265, 1059–1064.
36. Kimball, A. S., Lee, J., Jayaram, M. & Tullius, T. D.
(1993).
Sequence-speciﬁc
cleavage
of
DNA
via
nucleophilic attack of hydrogen peroxide, assisted
by Flp recombinase. Biochemistry, 32, 4698–4701.
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies
571


--- Page 14 ---
37. Viladot, J. L., de Ramon, E., Durany, O. & Planas, A.
(1998). Probing the mechanism of Bacillus 1,3-1,4-
beta-D-glucan 4-glucanohydrolases by chemical res-
cue of inactive mutants at catalytically essential resi-
dues. Biochemistry, 37, 11332–11342.
38. Admiraal, S. J., Schneider, B., Meyer, P., Janin, J.,
Veron, M., Deville-Bonne, D. & Herschlag, D. (1999).
Nucleophilic activation by positioning in phosphoryl
transfer catalyzed by nucleoside diphosphate kinase.
Biochemistry, 38, 4701–4711.
39. Hori, T., Kumasaka, T., Yamamoto, M., Nonaka, N.,
Tanaka, N., Hashimoto, Y. et al. (2001). Structure of a
new aspzincin metalloendopeptidase from Grifola
frondosa: implications for the catalytic mechanism
and substrate speciﬁcity based on several different
crystal forms. Acta Crystallog. sect. D, 57, 361–368.
40. Szeltner, Z., Renner, V. & Polgar, L. (2000). Substrate-
and pH-dependent contribution of oxyanion binding
site to the catalysis of prolyl oligopeptidase, a para-
digm of the serine oligopeptidase family. Protein Sci.
9, 353–360.
41. Vazeux, G., Iturrioz, X., Corvol, P. & Llorens-Cortes,
C. (1997). A tyrosine residue essential for catalytic
activity
in
aminopeptidase
A.
Biochem.
J.
327,
883–889.
42. Bryan, P., Pantoliano, M. W., Quill, S. G., Hsiao, H. Y.
& Poulos, T. (1986). Site-directed mutagenesis and
the role of the oxyanion hole in subtilisin. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 83, 3743–3745.
43. O’Connell, T. P., Day, R. M., Torchilin, E. V., Bachov-
chin, W. W. & Malthouse, J. G. (1997). A 13C-NMR
study of the role of Asn-155 in stabilizing the oxya-
nion of a subtilisin tetrahedral adduct. Biochem. J.
326, 861–866.
44. Menard, R., Carriere, J., Laﬂamme, P., Plouffe, C.,
Khouri, H. E., Vernet, T. et al. (1991). Contribution of
the glutamine 19 side chain to transition-state stabil-
ization in the oxyanion hole of papain. Biochemistry,
30, 8924–8928.
45. Nicolas, A., Egmond, M., Verrips, C. T., de Vlieg, J.,
Longhi, S., Cambillau, C. & Martinez, C. (1996). Con-
tribution of cutinase serine 42 side chain to the stabil-
ization of the oxyanion transition state. Biochemistry,
35, 398–410.
46. Juhasz, T., Szeltner, Z., Renner, V. & Polgar, L. (2002).
Role of the oxyanion binding site and subsites s1 and
s2 in the catalysis of oligopeptidase B, a novel target
for
antimicrobial
chemotherapy.
Biochemistry,
41,
4096–4106.
47. Carlos, J. L., Klenotic, P. A., Paetzel, M., Strynadka,
N. C. & Dalbey, R. E. (2000). Mutational evidence of
transition state stabilization by serine 88 in Escheri-
chia coli type I signal peptidase. Biochemistry, 39,
7276–7283.
48. Bresler, M. M., Rosser, S. J., Basran, A. & Bruce, N. C.
(2000). Gene cloning and nucleotide sequencing and
properties of a cocaine esterase from Rhodococcus sp.
strain MB1. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 904–908.
49. Fastrez, J. & Fersht, A. R. (1973). Demonstration of
acyl-enzyme mechanism for the hydrolysis of pep-
tides and anilides by chymotrypsin. Biochemistry, 12,
2025–2034.
50. Huang, Y. T., Liaw, Y. C., Gorbatyuk, V. Y. & Huang,
T. H. (2001). Backbone dynamics of Escherichia coli
thioesterase/protease I: evidence of a ﬂexible active-
site environment for a serine protease. J. Mol. Biol.
307, 1075–1090.
51. Kirby, A. J. (1996). Enzyme mechanisms, models, and
mimics. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 35, 707–724.
52. Selzer, T., Albeck, S. & Schreiber, G. (2000). Rational
design of faster associating and tighter binding pro-
tein complexes. Nature Struct. Biol. 7, 537–541.
53. Wentworth, A. D., Jones, L. H., Wentworth, P., Jr,
Janda, K. D. & Lerner, R. A. (2000). Antibodies have
the intrinsic capacity to destroy antigens. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 10930–10935.
54. Takahashi, N., Kakinuma, H., Liu, L., Nishi, Y. &
Fujii, I. (2001). In vitro abzyme evolution to optimize
antibody recognition for catalysis. Nature Biotechnol.
19, 563–567.
55. Stewart, J. D. & Benkovic, S. J. (1995). Transition-state
stabilization as a measure of the efﬁciency of anti-
body catalysis. Nature, 375, 388–391.
56. Grifﬁths, A. D. & Tawﬁk, D. S. (2000). Man-made
enzymes—from design to in vitro compartmentalisa-
tion. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 11, 338–353.
57. Yang, A. S., Gunner, M. R., Sampogna, R., Sharp, K.
& Honig, B. (1993). On the calculation of pKas in pro-
teins. Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet. 15, 252–265.
58. Landry, D. W., Zhao, K., Yang, G. X., Glickman, M. &
Georgiadis, T. M. (1993). Antibody-catalyzed degra-
dation of cocaine. Science, 259, 1899–1901.
Edited by I. Wilson
(Received 21 November 2001; received in revised form 24 April 2002; accepted 25 April 2002)
572
Mechanism of Esterolytic Antibodies
