--- Page 1 ---
Article
Systematic Detection of Amino Acid Substitutions in
Proteomes Reveals Mechanistic Basis of Ribosome
Errors and Selection for Translation Fidelity
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d A new methodology to detect and quantify most translation
errors in proteomes
d Most amino acid substitutions result from mis-pairing
between codons and anti-codons
d Proteins’ error rates are reduced at conserved and highly
expressed proteins
d Translation speed is negatively correlated with error rates
Authors
Ernest Mordret, Orna Dahan,
Omer Asraf, ..., Tamar Geiger,
Ariel B. Lindner, Yitzhak Pilpel
Correspondence
geiger@tauex.tau.ac.il (T.G.),
ariel.lindner@inserm.fr (A.B.L.),
pilpel@weizmann.ac.il (Y.P.)
In Brief
Errors in translation are common,
occurring almost once per protein.
Mordret et al. have developed a
methodology to detect and quantify
translation errors and applied it to
bacteria and yeast. Errors appear to be
programmed, reduced in highly
expressed proteins and conserved
protein sites. Codon identity and
ribosome speed participate in governing
a protein translation ﬁdelity code.
Mordret et al., 2019, Molecular Cell 75, 427–441
August 8, 2019 ª 2019 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.06.041


--- Page 2 ---
Molecular Cell
Article
Systematic Detection of Amino Acid Substitutions
in Proteomes Reveals Mechanistic Basis of Ribosome
Errors and Selection for Translation Fidelity
Ernest Mordret,1,2,3,6 Orna Dahan,1,6 Omer Asraf,1 Roni Rak,1 Avia Yehonadav,1 Georgina D. Barnabas,4 J€urgen Cox,5
Tamar Geiger,4,* Ariel B. Lindner,2,3,* and Yitzhak Pilpel1,7,*
1Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
2Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´ dicale, U1001
3CRI, Universite´ Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cite´ , Paris, France
4Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
5Computational Systems Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
6These authors contributed equally
7Lead Contact
*Correspondence: geiger@tauex.tau.ac.il (T.G.), ariel.lindner@inserm.fr (A.B.L.), pilpel@weizmann.ac.il (Y.P.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.06.041
SUMMARY
The translation machinery and the genes it decodes
co-evolved to achieve production throughput and
accuracy.
Nonetheless,
translation
errors
are
frequent, and they affect physiology and protein evo-
lution. Mapping translation errors in proteomes and
understanding their causes is hindered by lack of a
proteome-wide experimental methodology. We pre-
sent the ﬁrst methodology for systematic detection
and quantiﬁcation of errors in entire proteomes.
Following proteome mass spectrometry, we identify,
in E. coli and yeast, peptides whose mass indicates
speciﬁc amino acid substitutions. Most substitutions
result
from
codon-anticodon
mispairing.
Errors
occur at sites that evolve rapidly and that minimally
affect energetic stability, indicating selection for
high translation ﬁdelity. Ribosome density data
show that errors occur at sites where ribosome ve-
locity is higher, demonstrating a trade-off between
speed and accuracy. Treating bacteria with an ami-
noglycoside antibiotic or deprivation of speciﬁc
amino acids resulted in particular patterns of errors.
These results reveal a mechanistic and evolutionary
basis for translation ﬁdelity.
INTRODUCTION
Genetic information propagation is subject to errors in DNA repli-
cation, transcription, and translation. DNA replication typically
manifests the highest ﬁdelity, featuring a mutation rate on the or-
der of 109–1010 per nucleotide per genome doubling (Lee et al.,
2012; Zhu et al., 2014). ‘‘Phenotypic errors’’—i.e., errors in
transcription and translation—occur at a considerably higher
rate. The bacterial RNA polymerase misincorporation rate
is 104–105per nucleotide (Traverse and Ochman, 2016).Amino
acid substitutions rates are higher, estimated to be 104–103
per incorporated residue (Kramer and Farabaugh, 2007).
Translation errors can result either from the charging of a tRNA
with the wrong, ‘‘non-cognate’’ amino acid (synthetase error or
‘‘mischarging’’) or from the ribosome failing to discriminate
against imperfect codon-anticodon complexes in its A-site (ribo-
some error or ‘‘mispairing’’). The accuracy of both processes is
ampliﬁed by kinetic proofreading (Hopﬁeld, 1974; Ninio, 1975),
a general mechanism that, through an irreversible energy-
consuming step, allows discrimination levels that are inacces-
sible at thermodynamic equilibrium. Theoretical models have
demonstrated that proofreading is subject to an inherent trade-
off between speed, accuracy, and energetic cost (Wohlgemuth
et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2016; Banerjee et al., 2017).
The resources cells invest to ensure that proteins function
properly indicate that errors during protein synthesis strongly
affect ﬁtness. Proteins that are translated with errors can mis-
fold, aggregate, be engaged with wrong interactions, and
saturate the protein quality control machinery, resulting in pro-
teotoxic stress (Drummond and Wilke, 2009) and diseases;
e.g., in aging (Lee et al., 2006; Lindner and Demarez, 2009; Kapur
and Ackerman, 2018). Conversely, some errors might be advan-
tageous. Moderate levels of methionine misacylation on non-
methionine tRNAs can provide a ﬁtness advantage in oxidative
stress in bacteria and humans (Netzer et al., 2009; Jones et al.,
2011; Wiltrout et al., 2012). High error rates allow a parasitic
yeast to increase its adherence and evasion of immunity
(Miranda et al., 2013). Mistranslation is beneﬁcial in response
to environmental stresses because it disseminates phenotypic
viability in surface proteins (Miranda et al., 2013). On an evolu-
tionary timescale, phenotypic errors might open evolutionary
paths otherwise precluded by epistatic interactions (Whitehead
et al., 2008), and they may facilitate purging of deleterious muta-
tions (Bratulic et al., 2017). Natural selection constrains the iden-
tity of codons at evolutionarily conserved positions, suggesting
that evolution favors more accurate codons at these sites (Drum-
mond and Wilke, 2008).
These profound biological implications of translation ﬁdelity
reveal the need to measure translation accuracy per site per
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019 ª 2019 Elsevier Inc.
427


--- Page 3 ---
protein throughout proteomes under diverse life conditions.
However, although the rates of DNA mutation and RNA polymer-
ase errors are now quantiﬁable thanks to sequencing, errors in
protein translation have remained elusive at the proteome-wide
level. An early effort by Edelmann and Gallant (1977), who
directed at cysteine misincorporation in E. coli’s ﬂagellin, sug-
gested an error occurring every 10,000 amino acids. Lumines-
cent reporters allowed quantitative tracking of mistranslation at
deﬁned positions within these reporter genes (Kramer and Fara-
baugh, 2007; Kramer et al., 2010). These methods have high-
lighted the importance of codon-anticodon recognition and
tRNA competition as determinants of these error rates.
However, current methods only estimate an averaged error
rate for entire proteomes, and, hence, major questions remain
open. Accurate and broad measurements of error rate per pro-
tein per position would reveal whether error rates change within
and between proteins. This would shed light on the relative
contribution of tRNA synthetases and ribosomes to translation
errors. Detecting and quantifying amino acid substitutions
across the proteome may reveal evolutionary constraints
imposed by translation inﬁdelity and whether and how overall
translation ﬁdelity responds to environmental and genetic pertur-
bations and allow us to ﬁnd out whether organisms modulate er-
ror levels locally.
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics enable routine,
high-throughput characterization of proteomes and common
post-translational modiﬁcations (PTMs) and has been described
as an upcoming tool for the study of protein mistranslation
(Drummond and Wilke, 2009). Proteomics have been harnessed
to detect various substitutions from several puriﬁed recombinant
proteins (Zhang et al., 2013) and to track the incorporation of nor-
valine at leucine positions in E. coli mutants (Cvetesic et al.,
2016). However, MS has yet to be harnessed for the systematic
study of amino acid substitutions on a proteome-wide scale.
Such a study has so far been hindered by the low abundance
of substitutions compared with other natural and post-transla-
tional protein modiﬁcations and a much larger search space.
Here we performed a deep proteomics analysis to detect and
quantify translation errors in E. coli under normal and perturbed
conditions, repurposing the MaxQuant algorithm (Cox and
Mann, 2008) from its typical PTM analysis to identify mass shifts
in peptides that result from amino acid substitutions. We then
validated these identiﬁcations using a set of independent
analyses that included a shift in high-pressure liquid chromatog-
raphy (HPLC) retention time because of a change in hydropho-
bicity of the encoded amino acid. Our dataset of translation error
events allowed us to start unraveling the mechanistic basis and
evolutionarily selective forces that shape translation errors and
ﬁdelity. We found that most errors result from mispairing be-
tween codons and near-cognate tRNAs, mostly within the A
site of the ribosome. We derived the amino acid error spectrum
of each codon in the genetic code to deduce patterns of codon
mispairing at each of its three codon positions. We found that the
aminoglycoside drug affects the error pattern and revealed that it
mainly causes errors because of mispairing at the third codon
position. By depriving cells of particular amino acids, we
observed misincorporation of speciﬁc amino acids instead of
the depleted ones. In addition, comparing the substitutions
spectra between yeast and bacteria revealed a similar error
pattern, probably reﬂecting shared chemical constraints. Finally,
we found that errors are allowed to occur more frequently at
evolutionarily rapidly evolving sites, at protein structure sites in
which mutations are more tolerated energetically, in lowly ex-
pressed proteins, and in positions along mRNAs in which the
ribosome progresses more rapidly.
RESULTS
A Pipeline to Conﬁdently Identify Amino Acid
Substitutions in a Proteome
MS enables identiﬁcation of peptides within complex samples.
From a computational point of view, amino acid substitutions
can be regarded as a particular case of PTMs, many of which
are now routinely studied at the proteome level. However, the
standard database search algorithm is not suitable for large-
scale detection of substitutions. Assuming peptides of an
average length of 10 amino acids, there would be on the order
of 200 times more singly modiﬁed than canonical peptides to
search for, leading to impractical search times and a consider-
able loss of statistical power.
Blind modiﬁcation searches (Tsur et al., 2005; Savitski et al.,
2006; Na et al., 2012) offer a way to identify modiﬁed peptides
without requiring the user to enter a list of predeﬁned modiﬁca-
tions. They rely on the observation that modiﬁed peptides are
usually less abundant than their unmodiﬁed counterparts and
are therefore only likely to be present in the sample if their corre-
sponding unmodiﬁed peptide has already been detected. We
thus adapted MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008), developed for
the analysis of PTMs, to identify mistranslated peptides using
its ‘‘dependent peptide search’’ algorithm (Figure 1A). Depen-
dent peptides are deﬁned as peptides that show mass shifts in
comparison with the unmodiﬁed, genome-encoded ‘‘base pep-
tides’’ (Figure 1B). We applied a series of ﬁlters to the list of iden-
tiﬁed dependent peptides to stringently remove known PTMs
and known artifacts and conservatively retain only amino acid
substitutions (STAR Methods). A full dataset of all identiﬁed sub-
stitution errors can be found in Table S1 and Table S2.
Most of the High-Quality Hits Are Bona Fide Amino Acid
Substitutions
Aiming to identify translation errors in E. coli, we generated deep
proteomics proﬁles that would allow detection of the rare
mistranslation events. In total, we generated error maps of 10
samples, each in two replicates (STAR Methods). First, we
grew wild-type E. coli cells (MG1655) in deﬁned medium (3-(N-
morpholino)propanesulfonic acid [MOPS] complete, 37C) in
biological duplicates, harvested cells at three time points—two
time points during the exponential phase (t1 optical density
[OD], 0.5; t2 OD, 1.5) and one time point during the stationary
phase (t3 OD, 2.3)—and used our pipeline to detect amino acid
substitutions. Mass spectrometers sample, in priority, the most
abundant peptides for MS2 fragmentation. Because we expect
translation errors to be present at a much lower level than their
corresponding error-free peptides (Figure S1), we fractionated
our samples to reduce their complexity and increase the
chances of sampling low-abundance peptides. We separated
428
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019


--- Page 4 ---
proteins into a high-solubility and a low-solubility fraction (Khan
et al., 2011) that could be enriched with error products and
further fractionated each cellular fraction into ﬁve chemical frac-
tions by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography.
Given mass differences detected between a pair of base and
dependent peptides, we must ﬁrst establish that they represent
bona ﬁde amino acid substitutions and not methodological arti-
facts and examine the possibility that they may represent PTMs
with exactly the same mass difference. We took advantage of the
fact that many amino acid substitutions result in a change of pep-
tide hydrophobicity and that they should hence result in retention
time shifts during liquid chromatography (LC). The retention time
of a peptide can be predicted with high accuracy (R2 > 0.9) as the
sum of the hydrophobicity coefﬁcients of its amino acids (Moruz
and K€all, 2017). Therefore, the predicted HPLC retention time of
the substituted amino acid can be computed and compared with
the observed retention time recorded for the substituted peptide.
We trained a retention time prediction algorithm (Goloborodko
et al., 2013) on a list of identiﬁed unmodiﬁed peptides and
used it to generate an expectation of the retention time shift
induced by the substitutions (Figure S2). We compared this
expectation with the observed retention time shift for each of
the detected substitutions (Figure 1C), revealing a good agree-
ment, indicating that we typically correctly identify amino acid re-
placements. Because MS2 spectra are systematically recorded
for highly abundant parent ions, our sampling strategy is biased
toward detection of substitutions originating from highly abun-
dant peptides (Figure S1). We devised a procedure (Figure S5)
that estimated that approximately 8% of the substituted pep-
tides detected by the pipeline are likely un-annotated PTMs or
artifacts.
We deﬁne a substitution as a combination of a position in a
protein, characterized by an ‘‘origin’’ amino acid, its associated
codon, and a ‘‘destination’’ amino acid. We then divide substitu-
tions into two sets: a near cognate error (NeCE) is deﬁned to be
the case when the error-bearing codon of the origin amino acid
matches (any) two of three bases of at least one of the codons
of the destination amino acid, and a non-cognate error (NoCE)
is deﬁned to be the case when none of the codons of the wrongly
incorporated amino acid match, with one mismatch, the codon
of the original amino acid (cases in which the original codon
matched one of the destination codons by two nucleotides but
Figure 1. A Computational Pipeline to Conﬁdently Identify Amino Acid Substitutions from Mass Spectrometry Data
(A) Overview of the pipeline. For a detailed description of the different steps, see STAR Methods. Numbers indicate the number of peptides identiﬁed in each step
of the pipeline.
(B) The MaxQuant-dependent peptide search performs exhaustive pairing of unidentiﬁed spectra to a spectral library derived from the identiﬁed spectra. For each
pair of (identiﬁed, unidentiﬁed) spectra of the same charge z and found in the same fraction, the algorithm ﬁrst computes the mass difference Dm = munidentiﬁed 
midentiﬁed. It simulates, in silico and sequentially, the addition of a single moiety of mass Dm at any position in the identiﬁed peptide and generates the corre-
sponding theoretical spectrum for the modiﬁed peptide. These spectra are then compared with the experimental spectrum using MaxQuant Andromeda’s score
formula. The pair with the highest score is retained, and the signiﬁcance of the match is assessed using a target-decoy false discovery rate (FDR) procedure.
(C) The observed retention time shift induced by our set of substitutions is accurately predicted by a simple sequence-based retention time model.
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019
429


--- Page 5 ---
the destination codon does not have a perfectly matched
cognate tRNA in the organisms’ genome were also considered
as NoCE). For example, a substitution from serine encoded by
AGC into an asparagine is considered a NeCE because one of
the codons encoding asparagine, AAC, represents a single
mismatch (A instead of G at the second position); in contrast,
substitution of a cysteine encoded by a UGU into an alanine
must be a NoCE. The structure of the genetic code dictates
that, of all detectable codon-to-amino acid substitutions, 30%
are expected to be of the NeCE type. In stark contrast, in our
data of detected substitutions, 64% of the unique substitutions
with the core E. coli dataset (wild-type, MOPS complete) are
classiﬁed as NeCE. Such enrichment for NeCE serves as an indi-
cation that we inspect genuine amino acid substitutions.
The ribosome uses small differences in free energy between
correct and incorrect codon-anticodon matches to select tRNAs
and hasbeen shown to generateNeCEs at much higher rates than
NoCEs(KramerandFarabaugh,2007).Duringloading ofanamino
acid by an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, an error can stem from
the choice of an incorrect tRNA or loading of an incorrect amino
acid. Because the majority of synthetases assess the identity of
the tRNA by probing the bases of the anticodon, this ﬁrst mecha-
nism of error is also likely to generate mostly NeCEs. However, if
the error results from loading of the wrong amino acid, then there
should be a priori no preference for NeCEs over NoCEs. We will
consider NoCEs as more likely to stem from a synthetase error,
and we will examine below the notion that the majority of NeCEs
indeed represent mRNA-tRNA mispairing events.
The E. coli Amino Acid Substitution Landscape
We generated 61 3 20 codon-to-amino acid matrices that depict
the prevalence of each type of amino acid misincorporation (Fig-
ures 2A and S3). The i,jth entry in the matrix depicts the numbers of
unique peptides in the proteome in which amino acid j was found
to be misincorporated instead of an amino acid encoded by
codon i. Because leucine and isoleucine share the same mass,
we cannot distinguish them as error destinations. Furthermore,
substitution types that transform a codon into its cognate amino
acid or that involve a stop codon or substitutions that cannot be
detected using our method because they represent a mass shift
that corresponds precisely to the mass shift and speciﬁcity of a
known PTM were discarded from subsequent analyses, and
they were grayed out in this graphical depiction (STAR Methods).
Even upon normalization of substitution counts to codon usage,
the matrices only have minor changes (data not shown).
The substitution matrix is highly structured, and some substi-
tutions appear to be much more prevalent than others. In partic-
ular, we observe that the codon used to encode an amino acid
position determines error patterns at the corresponding site.
This is nicely illustrated with substitutions from Gly to Asp and
Glu. When Gly is encoded by the GGC codon, the frequent sub-
stitution destination is the near-cognate Asp (which can be en-
coded by GAC), whereas encoding Gly with GGA often results
in substitution of Gly with Glu (presumably because of its near-
cognate codon GAA). Similar additional cases were found for
other amino acids (Figure 2A).
We calculated the observed error rate, estimated as the ratio of
intensity between the dependent and base peptide, for abun-
dantly detected substitutions at each site where it occurred.
Because we measured the proteome at different time points dur-
ing culture growth (Figure S4), we could follow the error rate for
those substitutions as the culture grew. As an example, the
SerAGC/Asn substitution was detected among a total of 81
different peptides across the proteome in untreated, MOPS-
complete samples. Figure 2B summarizes the error rate
estimations; each dot in the plot corresponds to one speciﬁc sub-
stitution on a particular proteomic position, and the error rate is on
the x axis. Shown are the 10 most frequent substitutions types in
the proteome. The majority of the substitutions that are observ-
able in our dataset span the error rate range around 103, with
the most highly abundant substitutions showing slightly higher
error rates. Because of the MS acquisition strategy, positions
that feature a low error rate are less likely to be detected, which
could lead to over-estimation of the actual error rates. We note
that, for most substitution types, the error rates seem to consis-
tently decline as cells progress from exponential to stationary
phase; of the 10 most prevalent substitution types, only two
follow the opposite trend, and both involve the common glycine
GGC codon, perhaps reﬂecting an intracellular shortage of
glycine. However, it is possible that this measured decline in error
level may in part reﬂect a general potential decrease in total
protein synthesis in cells as they enter the stationary phase, a sit-
uation that, when accompanied by degradation of erroneous pro-
teins, would result in an apparent decline in error levels.
What are the possible explanations for these error patterns
and preferences? One possibility is that imbalances in expres-
sion between a cognate and a near-cognate tRNA may lead to
translation errors. To examine this possibility, we performed
deep RNA sequencing of the bacterial tRNA pool at the same
time points where we measured the proteome during culture
growth. We could thus detect and quantify tRNA expression level
changes and examine the ratio of expression (and, hence, poten-
tial imbalances) between pairs of cognate and near-cognate
tRNAs. We examined, for all the substitutions shown in Figure 2B,
whether dynamic changes in error rates can be explained by
dynamic changes in tRNA level imbalances. We found that the
patterns in the majority of these cases are consistent with the
relative change in tRNA abundance. In particular, we see that,
if the ratio of abundance between the cognate and near-cognate
tRNA increases between two phases of the growth cycle (e.g.,
exponential phase to stationary phase), then the error rate be-
tween the corresponding amino acid tends to decrease, and,
vice versa, when the ratio decreases, the error rate increases
(Figure 2C). This indicates that some of the translation errors
indeed occur as the cognate and near-cognate tRNAs compete
on the ribosome’s A site, in part based on their relative concen-
trations. However, because of a paucity of examples, this result
cannot be declared statistically signiﬁcant.
A Global Nucleotide Mispairing Pattern for Translation
Errors
We further classiﬁed NeCEs based on the type of codon-anti-
codon mismatch within the codon and the nucleotide types
they involved. We created 4 3 4 ‘‘confusion matrices’’ that de-
pict the mispairing propensity of each nucleotide within the
codon to mispair against each nucleotide in the anti-codon.
430
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019


--- Page 6 ---
Because each of the three codon positions may feature
different mispairing patterns, we created three such matrices,
one for each codon position (Figure 3A). Most of the substitu-
tions were found to originate from a single mismatch type,
and substitutions that could not be unambiguously traced
back were assigned to the most likely mismatch using a greedy
algorithm (STAR Methods). The most frequently observed sub-
stitution types involve mismatches between uracil and guanine
in the ﬁrst or the second position of the codon. Interestingly,
this observation holds mainly for G:U mismatches in the ﬁrst
and second position of the codon, where the codon base is
G and the anticodon base is U. Other common mismatches
are G:G in the ﬁrst position and U:G in the second position of
the codon. The differences between the three matrices is
Figure 2. Overview of the Substitution Proﬁle of E. coli in MOPS Complete Medium
(A) Matrix of substitution identiﬁcations. Each entry in the matrix represents the number of independent substitutions detected for the corresponding (original
codon, destination amino acid) pair in the MOPS-complete dataset. The logarithmic color bar highlights the dynamic range of detection. Grey squares indicate
substitutions from a codon to its cognate amino acid, substitutions from the stop codon, or substitutions undetectable via our method because they are
indistinguishable from one of the PTMs or artifacts in the UniMod (http://www.unimod.org/) database. Substitutions to Leu and Ile are a priori undistinguishable
and thus grouped together.
(B) Left panel: for each of the top 10 most frequently detected substitution types, we fetched the quantiﬁcation proﬁle of the dependent peptide and the base
peptide. Each dot represents the ratio of intensities IDP/IBP for each of the samples when both peaks were detected and quantiﬁed. The black lines indicate the
medians of the distributions. Colors indicate the growth phase of the culture in which samples were taken: exponential (t1 OD, 0.5), mid-log (mid/late log t2 OD,
1.5), and stationary (t3 OD, 2.3). Right panel: we inferred the most likely mismatch for each of the substitution types, using a procedure described in the STAR
Methods. This allows us to guess that the V-to-I/L substitutions are likely substitutions from Val to Ile, enabled by a G:U mismatch at the ﬁrst position (in cases in
which the corresponding tRNA was missing, we considered a wobble providing tRNA).
(C) tRNA imbalances might explain error patterns. Following tRNA deep sequencing during the culture growth cycle, we calculated, for each of these 10 most
common error types, the ratio of expression between the cognate and near-cognate tRNA. The ratio of expression between mid-log to exponential time points is
color-coded,andlikewisebetweenstationary toexponentialtimepoints(,p< 0.1,,,p< 0.05,n=3).Agreenmarktotheleft ofthecolormapindicates thatthechange
in the ratio between the cognate to near-cognate tRNA expression correctly predicts a decline or an increase in the error rate of the corresponding codon-to-amino
acid event, a red mark indicates lack of agreement, and the single white mark is a case in which the error pattern in (B) did not show a clear temporal trend.
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019
431


--- Page 7 ---
among the several indications gathered here that we observe
translation errors and not transcription errors.
E. coli and S. cerevisiae Share Similar Error Proﬁles
We then wished to compare error proﬁles between bacteria and
an eukaryoteto examinewhethererrors are constrained by chem-
ical or evolutionary necessities. We reanalyzed a previously pub-
lished MS dataset of strong anion exchange (SAX) and SCX
fractionated proteomes of S. cerevisiae grown under a single con-
dition, a rich medium (30C, yeast extract peptone dextrose
(YPD))(Kulak et al., 2014) using our pipeline (Figure 3B, leftmatrix).
Similarly to the core E. coli dataset, the majority of the errors were
classiﬁed as NeCEs (63%). Comparing the error spectrum be-
tween the two species (Figure 3B, center matrix), we observed a
high overlap between the set of substitution types. For example,
the most highly frequent substitution types (e.g., MetAUG/Thr,
SerAGC/Asn, ValGUU/Ile/Leu) are shared between the two spe-
cies. Among the34 substitution types observed more than oncein
the yeast dataset, 25 had been seen in the E. coli samples. Among
the 25 substitution types also detected in E. coli, 16 were NeCEs.
Conversely, among the remaining 9 substitution types that were
not seen in the bacterial samples, only 4 were NeCEs. This
observation reveals a universal error pattern for mistakes that
arelikelytooccur withintheribosome,whereasmostNoCEslikely
originate from separate factors unique to each of the species.
The most notable difference between the two species (marked
with a light blue rectangle in the three matrices in Figure 3B) is in
the most frequently observed substitution of Cys to Ala in yeast,
which is not seen in the bacterium. A recent report (Sun et al.,
2016)revealed thebasisforthisexactobservation:theeukaryotic,
but not prokaryotic, alanyl-tRNA synthetase (AlaRS) tends to
mischarge tRNACys with alanine.
For the yeast data, we also computed three 4 3 4 confusion
matrices and observed that, similar to the E. coli matrices, they
also predominantly feature G:U mismatches at the ﬁrst or sec-
ond positions (Figure 3A), but the eukaryote also shows an
elevated level of G:G mispairing in the second position.
Observing such levels of error similarity between such loosely
related organisms suggests that these errors depend on univer-
sal chemical or genetic constraints.
Figure 3. Error Spectra in E. coli and S. cerevisiae Reveal a Shared Signature
(A) Top panel: an example of a NeCE-originated substitution. Bottom panels: NeCEs are classiﬁed by the mismatch most likely to generate them. The shade
intensity reﬂects the logarithm (base 2) of the number of peptides in which the corresponding mismatch was observed. Grey boxes are either correct base
pairings or mismatches to which no substitutions could be unambiguously mapped. To measure similarity or dissimilarity between pairs of 4 3 4 matrices, we
computed Pearson’s correlations between (linearized forms) of pairs of matrices. We compared all three codon position-speciﬁc matrices within each species
and also each pair of matrices at each codon position between the two species. Of all comparisons between matrix pairs, two were signiﬁcantly correlated (hence
demonstrating similar substitution patterns). The E. coli matrix at position 1 was similar to the S. cerevisiae matrix at position 1 (r = 0.94, p = 6 3 106), and the
E. coli matrix at position 2 was similar to the S. cerevisiae matrix at position 2 (r = 0 0.86, p = 3 3 104). All other pairs of matrices were non-signiﬁcantly similar.
(B) The substitution identiﬁcations matrices of S. cerevisiae (green channel, left) and wild-type E. coli grown on MOPS complete (red channel, right) are compared
and overlaid (center). The intensity of the color is proportional to the logarithm of the number of independent identiﬁcations, with one pseudo-count. Values are
normalized by the highest entry in the matrix for each of the two organisms. The blue box highlights the recently described property of eukaryotic AlaRS to
mischarge tRNACys. The same statistical procedure as in (A) was conducted (r = 0.4, p = 1 3 1040).
432
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019


--- Page 8 ---
Aminoglycoside Treatment and Amino Acid Depletion
Affect the Translation Error Spectrum
We characterized error patterns upon perturbations. First, we
grew E. coli in Luria-Bertani medium (LB) supplemented with
sub-lethal concentrations of paromomycin, an aminoglycoside
antibiotic known to interfere with the ribosome’s proofreading
activity (Gromadski and Rodnina, 2004; Kramer and Farabaugh,
2007). We inspected the codon-to-amino acid error matrices un-
der treated and non-treated conditions (Figure 4A), the error rate
proﬁles (Figure 4B), and the nucleotide mispairing matrices (Fig-
ure 4C). Comparing the codon-to-amino acid substitution
matrices between treated and untreated samples revealed a
clear pattern: the drug increased error rates, especially at third
codon wobble positions.
Next we examined the effect of amino acid depletion on the
cell’s error spectrum. In three parallel experiments, we partially
depleted either isoleucine, proline, or serine using the corre-
sponding auxotrophic E. coli strains or the wild-type strain
(STAR Methods). We predicted that, upon depletion of each of
the amino acids, we would observe elevated levels of errors spe-
ciﬁc to the deleted amino acid. Further, we examined which
amino acids replaced the depleted one and which codons of
the original depleted amino acid were more sensitive to deple-
tion. Overall, we observed increased translation errors, typically
leading from certain codons of the depleted amino acid to other
amino acid destinations, which were typically NeCEs of the
depleted one (Figure 5); there were no major changes in the
rate of substitution from other amino acids (data not shown).
Depletion of Ile resulted in an elevation of errors in the auxotroph
(DIlvA) strain, in which Ile is replaced predominantly with Met,
Thr, and Val, all destinations that represent NeCE substitutions
(Figure 5A). Upon depletion of Pro, we also detect new errors
leading mainly from proline, and the main new destinations
were Ala, Ile/Leu, Thr, and Ser (all NeCEs of the corresponding
codons apart from Ile, which cannot be distinguished from Leu
with MS). Curiously, these new substitutions were more preva-
lent when the auxotroph was grown on complete medium rather
than on proline-depleted medium (Figure 5B). Upon depletion of
serine,
proline
(a NeCE substitution)
becomes
the most
abundantly observed new destination of serine. The AGU and
AGC codons are often substituted with Asn, but this dynamics
is also observed in the non-depleted wild type (Figure 5C).
However, when we followed a time course of the translation error
dynamics across the growth of the culture toward stationary
phase, these codons showed more intricate dynamics. We
observed, as expected, an increase in the rate of SerAGC/Asn
mistranslation, and the rate of this error intensiﬁed as the cells
approached stationary phase, when the depletion effect intensi-
ﬁed (Figure 5D). This result indicates a clear mechanism that ac-
counts for mistakes in translation in which a shortage of an amino
Figure 4. The Error Spectrum Is Affected by Sub-lethal Concentrations of Paromomycin
(A) The substitution identiﬁcations matrices of E. coli in LB (red channel, left) or LB supplemented with paromomycin (green channel, right) are compared and
overlaid (center). The intensity of the color is proportional to the logarithm of the number of independent identiﬁcations, with one pseudo-count. Values are
normalized by the highest entry in the matrix for each of the two conditions. The blue boxes highlight errors involving third-position mismatches.
(B) Quantiﬁcation of the top 10 most frequent substitutions in the drugs dataset. Errors involving third-position mismatches are shaded in light blue.
(C) NeCEs are classiﬁed using the same procedure as in Figure 3A for the LB samples, with or without paromomycin. The shade intensity reﬂects the logarithm
(base 2) of the number of peptides in which the corresponding mismatch was observed. Pearson correlation was calculated as in Figure 3A. Signiﬁcantly similar
positions found were as follows: LB position 2 against position 2 of LB + paromomycin (r = 0.92, p = 1 3 105) and LB position 1 against position 3 (r = 0.83,
p = 7 3 104).
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019
433


--- Page 9 ---
acid determines its probability to be replaced by others. A theo-
retical model (Elf et al., 2003) predicts that the UCN serine co-
dons should be affected more strongly by depletion than the
AGC and AGU codons due to differential loading of the corre-
sponding tRNAs. Indeed, our method detected increased
number of substitutions stemming from the UCN codons upon
starvation. On the other hand, the rate of substitution shows an
increase, upon deletion, in the AGC and AGU codons. This
observation does not necessarily contradict the theory because
the AGC and AGU errors are also those most seen in MOPS
complete medium, and it is possible that the UCX codons suffer
more from starvation, but the substitutions in these codons re-
mained at low levels in absolute terms.
Surprisingly, we also observed a signal for threonine-to-serine
substitutions, which is independent of the threonine codon (data
not shown). This is in line with the observation made by Ling and
Soll (2010), who reported that E. coli’s threonine aaRS tended to
misincorporate serine for threonine during oxidative stress
conditions.
A Tradeoff between Fidelity and Speed of Translation by
the Ribosome
The theory of kinetic proofreading (Hopﬁeld, 1974; Ninio, 1975)
predicts that the ribosome trades-off speed and accuracy dur-
ing the aa-tRNA selection step, with a higher error rate ex-
pected at positions where the ribosome decodes more rapidly
(Banerjee et al., 2017). This trade-off was experimentally
Figure 5. Depleting Cells of Particular Amino Acids Promotes Mistranslation at Certain Codons of the Corresponding Amino Acid
The shade of each cell is proportional to the logarithm of the number of different peptides observed bearing a substitution from the codon on the y axis to the
amino acid on the x axis. Only codons of the depleted amino acid are represented for clarity in each panel; other amino acids rarely show a response relative to the
wild type, not depleted.
(A) Effects of isoleucine depletion on isoleucine codons. Top: wild type grown on complete medium. Center: DilvA, an isoleucine auxotroph, grown on complete
medium. Bottom: DilvA grown on medium depleted of isoleucine.
(B) Effects of proline depletion on proline codons: Top: wild type grown on complete medium. Center: DproA, a proline auxotroph, grown on complete medium.
Bottom: DproA grown on medium depleted of proline.
(C) Effects of serine depletion on serine codons: Top: wild type grown on complete medium (6 samples pooled). Bottom: DserA, a serine auxotroph grown on
medium depleted of serine (6 samples pooled).
(D) Error rate quantiﬁcation of the three most common error types for serine depletion. Error rates were computed as the ratio of intensities of the substituted and
the unmodiﬁed parent peptide. Colors indicate the growth phase of each of the three time points when samples were taken for each of the two cultures. Exact OD
values can be found in Figure S4.
434
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019


--- Page 10 ---
observed in vitro as a function of magnesium concentrations
(Johansson, Zhang and Ehrenberg, 2012) and in vivo while
comparing hyper and hypo-accurate ribosomal mutants (Zhu,
Dai and Wang, 2016). Yang et al. (2014) proposed that yeast
cells take advantage of mRNA structures downstream of the
ribosome to tip this trade-off toward faster or more accurate
decoding.
The speed at which ribosomes translate mRNAs can be esti-
mated at nucleotide resolution from ribosome footprint density
(Ingolia, 2016). Such data allowed us to test whether substitu-
tions arise preferentially at quickly translated positions. We esti-
mated the A-site ribosome density across the proteome of E. coli
(MG1655) using a published dataset acquired under similar con-
ditions (Woolstenhulme et al., 2015) and standardized this den-
sity score per protein to control for intergenic differences in
mRNA
abundance
and
translation
initiation
levels
(STAR
Methods). We compared the mean ribosome density at error
sites with that of sets of random controls (Figure 6A). In each
of the controls, the mean ribosome density of the bona ﬁde sub-
stitutions was found to be lower than that of most of the random
controls (Figure 6C); error sites are less dense and, hence, trans-
lated faster than expected by chance. The mean density at sites
associated with a substitution was signiﬁcantly (p = 0.025) lower
than expected under our null model controlling for biases asso-
ciated with codon identity.
Misincorporations Occur at Error-Tolerant and Rapidly
Evolving Protein Positions
A prediction (Drummond and Wilke, 2008) posited that, to avoid
ﬁtness loss because of protein misfolding and aggregation,
cells manage their errors by selecting error-proof codons at po-
sitions where inserting the correct amino acid is critical for
folding or function. Support for that theory was obtained by
computational means. To examine this notion, we computed
normalized conservation scores for each position in the
E. coli proteome (STAR Methods) so that a high score indicates
that an amino acid position evolves rapidly compared with
other positions in the same protein. To account for the fact
that some amino acids types tend to be more conserved than
others
and
that
some
codons
are
over-represented
at
conserved positions, we devised three strategies to generate
adequate negative controls (Figure 6A). In the ﬁrst and least
stringent control, for each observed substitution, we sampled
a normalized conservation score from any position in the
same protein. In the second control, the random re-sampling
was carried within the same protein but also with the additional
constraint that the amino acid type in the randomly sampled
position is identical to the amino acid type observed originally
at the position where the substitution occurred. Finally, in the
most stringent control, we performed random re-sampling
within the same protein at sites sharing the same codon as
the observed positions. We generated 1,000 such re-samplings
in each of the three types of negative controls and compared
the mean of the observed distribution of evolutionary rate
scores at the observed substitution positions with those of
the random control distributions to obtain empirical p values.
The mean rate of evolution at substitution sites was similar to
that of random sets of positions generated through the ﬁrst
model but signiﬁcantly higher than that of the random sets
generated with the other two (Figure 6B). Consistent with a pre-
vious prediction (Drummond and Wilke, 2008), controlling for
codon identity reduced the magnitude of the difference be-
tween the real error sites and randomly selected sites (second
and third control, Figure 6B, ‘‘same codon’’ versus ‘‘same
amino acid’’), supporting the notion that evolution allows or
precludes error-prone codons from sites that are correspond-
ingly tolerant or intolerant to errors. However, codon identity
did not fully account for the poor conservation at substituted
sites, suggesting that other factors allow cells to locally modu-
late their error levels.
Similarly to conservation, we examined the related possibil-
ity that observed substitutions minimally affect the energetic
folding stability of the protein in which they occur. We pre-
dicted the effect of each of the observed substitutions on its
protein’s folding stability (DDG). We compared the distribution
of DDG to mock distributions obtained via three control stra-
tegies (Figure 6D). The ﬁrst is the ‘‘identity control,’’ and it
allows us to test whether the observed NeCEs are less desta-
bilizing, on average, than other substitution types modeled to
occur at the same protein positions. We generated 1,000
random sets of DDG values so that for each observed substi-
tution,
we
randomly
sampled
a
destination
amino
acid
accessible via a single-nucleotide substitution from the er-
ror-bearing codon and computed the difference in free energy
resulting from the resulting amino acid substitution. The mean
DDG of the set of bona ﬁde substitutions, 1.45 kcal/mol, was
lower than that of each of the 1,000 mock sets sampled under
the identity control, suggesting that error rates are tuned so
that substitutions preferentially replace the original amino
acid with one that would minimally affect protein folding at
the same site. Our control strategy accounts for the fact that
substitution types classiﬁed as NeCEs tend to swap chemi-
cally similar amino acids because of the organization of the
genetic code. For a second negative control, we asked
whether the observed errors were preferentially mapped to
protein positions in which they minimally destabilize folding.
We generated 1,000 sets for each observed NeCE and esti-
mated the DDG that would have resulted from that same sub-
stitution occurring at a randomly chosen position of the same
protein sharing either the same amino acid (‘‘amino acid con-
trol’’) or the same codon (‘‘codon control’’). The mean DDG of
our set of observed substitutions was lower than that of 98%
of the sets generated with the amino acid control and 97% of
those generated with the codon control, suggesting that sub-
stitutions preferentially occur at protein sites where they
would not disturb folding.
Little Indication for Selective Degradation of Proteins
with Harmful Misincorporations
From the above analyses, it could be deduced that the transla-
tion machinery selectively avoids harmful errors. But an alterna-
tive interpretation could be that all errors, benign and harmful,
are equally likely to occur but that the protein degradation ma-
chinery selectively degrades proteins bearing harmful errors.
To address this alternative, we performed another full experi-
ment of our error detection pipeline on E. coli deleted for the
Lon protease, a protein that degrades misfolded and unfolded
proteins (Powers, Powers and Gierasch, 2012). In the Dlon strain,
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019
435


--- Page 11 ---
Figure 6. Global Properties of Substitution Errors
(A) General sampling strategy. To test whether the set of detected substitutions differs from expectations in any way, we ﬁrst need to account for the fact that
many local properties of proteins are affected by the protein’s expression level and so is our ability to detect substitutions from that protein. First, the local
property of interest (‘‘score’’) is recorded at all positions bearing a substitution. The average of that set is plotted as a red dashed line. To compare this average
with an appropriate control, we devised three strategies to eliminate the potential contributions of protein level, amino acid identity, and codon identity on the
score. In each of these strategies, we draw 1,000 sets of the same size as the set of observed substitutions and plot the average of each of these sets as a blue dot.
In the ﬁrst strategy, for every bona ﬁde distribution, we draw the score from any position within the same protein. In the second strategy, we draw the score from
any position within the same protein that shares the same amino acid as the one bearing the bona ﬁde substitution. Similarly, in the third control, the codon for the
sampled position has to be the same as the substituted codon.
(B) Amino acid conservation. We derived amino acid conservation scores for E. coli proteins using the COGs database to fetch 50 homologs, MUSCLE
(Edgar, 2004) to align them, and rate4site to estimate the evolutionary rate at each site. The resulting scores are standardized per protein, and a high score
indicates low conservation. The empirical p values are computed by dividing the number of blue dots above the red line by 1,000. n indicates the number of
positions considered in this analysis.
(C) Ribosome density. Ribosome proﬁling data from Woolstenhulme et al. (2015) was processed (STAR Methods) to estimate the ribosome density at positions
along the E. coli transcriptome. Because ribosome speed (density) can only affect errors in cis, this analysis was restricted to NeCEs. The empirical p values are
computed by dividing the number of blue dots bellow the red line by 1,000. n indicates the number of positions considered in this analysis.
(D) Effect of substitutions on protein stability. For proteins whose 3D structure is known, we evaluated the effect of NeCEs on protein stability using FoldX. In
control 1, we test whether the observed substitutions are, on average, less destabilizing than those stemming from other single-nucleotide mismatches between
the codon and the anticodon at the same position. In controls 2 and 3, we test whether the observed substitution type observed was less destabilizing, on
average, at the observed position than at other positions sharing the same amino acid or the same codon. The empirical p values are computed by dividing the
number of blue dots bellow the red line by 1,000. n indicates the number of positions considered in this analysis.
(E) Effect of Dlon. Top: distribution of DDG associated with substitutions observed in Dlon (blue) and wild type (green) strains. The mean of the two distributions
does not differ signiﬁcantly (two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p = 0.132). Bottom: distribution of the rate4site conservation score associated with substitutions
observed in Dlon (blue) and wild type (green) strains. The mean of the two distributions does not differ signiﬁcantly (two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p = 0.367).
436
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019


--- Page 12 ---
observed error rates should more closely mirror the actual trans-
lation error rate.
We detect more errors upon deletion of Lon (Figure S6A), indi-
cating that the protease indeed eliminates proteins with transla-
tion errors. However, we found that new errors exposed upon
deletion of the protease do not have a different level of de-stabi-
lizing effects on protein structure (Figure 6E, top; Figure S6B),
nor do they have any modiﬁed tendency to occur in more
(or less) slowly evolving sites in proteins (Figure 6E, bottom; Fig-
ure S6C). These results indicate that depletion of errors from
structurally sensitive and slowly evolving sites results from
genuine selection for higher accuracy at these sites. These re-
sults do not exclude the parallel possibility that the degradation
machinery has selectivity too, to eliminate preferentially proteins
with de-stabilizing errors. It is possible that other proteases
degrade proteins with de-stabilizing errors.
Misincorporations Occur Less Frequently in Highly
Expressed Proteins
Further to observing that sensitive and slowly evolving positions
along proteins show fewer errors than other sites on the same
proteins, we wanted to examine whether certain proteins display
overall lower error rates than others. In particular, we checked
whether more highly expressed genes exhibit lower error rates.
Indeed, we saw a negative correlation between protein expres-
sion level (taken from PaxDB; Wang et al., 2015) and mean error
rate among all peptides within a protein (Figures 7A and 7B). This
correlation is sustained across the entire dynamic range of pro-
tein abundance levels. The correlation was also observed when
Figure 7. The Error Rate Decreases with Protein Expression
Log 10 of the error rate (dependent peptide [DP]/base peptide [BP] intensity ratio) is plotted against the average protein expression. Log error rates of all detected
peptides within a protein are averaged into one score per protein. Only proteins with two or more dependent peptides were considered for this analysis.
(A and B) In the scatterplot (A), each protein is a dot, whereas in the violin plot (B), proteins are binned together based on expression. Protein expression for all
E. coli proteins are taken from PaxDB.
(C and D) Shows the same analysis but with the tRNA adaptation index (tAI) (dos Reis et al., 2004), a computational proxy for expression, instead of the
PaxDB data.
For the scatter plots (A and C), r indicates the Pearson correlation and p is the corresponding p value. n indicates the number of proteins. For the violin plots
(B and D), two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test was conducted. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019
437


--- Page 13 ---
we used two additional means to assess protein expression
levels, one based on the computational tRNA adaptation index
(dos Reis et al., 2004; Figures 7C and 7D) and a second based
on the current study’s protein expression data (data not shown).
This observation supports a model (Yang et al., 2014) that sug-
gested that, upon trading off accuracy and speed of translation,
highly expressed genes would be optimized for accurate trans-
lation because the cost of mistranslating them would be
prohibitive.
DISCUSSION
Here we provide a new methodology to detect and quantify
translation errors at protein and codon resolution. We quantify
the error rate to be around one misincorporation event per
1,000 translated residues on average, but this rate varies by
more than an order of magnitude between sites in proteins, co-
dons, and physiological conditions. Although translation errors
have, by deﬁnition, a short expiration time. Until the protein is
degraded, the reproducible nature of such errors—i.e., the fact
that same protein positions tend to repeatedly misincorporate
the same amino acid—actually indicate that errors endure
throughout the life of the organism as if they were encoded in
the DNA.
Although both the ribosome and the amino acid synthetases
are responsible for translation errors, the majority of errors de-
tected here appear to be made by the ribosome, which tends
to mispair codons against near-cognate anticodons, incorpo-
rating wrong amino acids based on codon similarity. Indeed,
codon choice can be conserved and can affect translation efﬁ-
ciency and accuracy (Conticello et al., 2000; Frumkin et al.,
2018; Rak et al., 2018). Although the error patterns show resem-
blance
between
prokaryotes
and
eukaryotes,
potentially
because of the chemical nature of base pairing, our analysis
did expose particular types of errors, predominantly in eukary-
otes, that correspond to known amino acid mischarging ten-
dencies of certain synthetases.
Several lines of evidence indicate that our observed amino
acid misincorporations events mainly represent translation er-
rors, not transcription errors. First, transcription error rates
are estimated at 105-106 per nucleotide (Traverse and Och-
man, 2016); i.e., up to three orders of magnitude lower than the
rate of detectable translation errors found here. Further, indica-
tions that we observed genuine translation errors and not tran-
scription are that (1) error tendencies correlate with ribosome
translation speed; (2) we observed different nucleotide mispair-
ing patterns at each of the three codon positions; and (3), we
employed two environmental perturbations that should only
affect translation—a drug against ribosome proofreading and
amino acid depletion, and they both modiﬁed and elevated de-
tected errors.
Measuring error rates per protein and per position within pro-
teins reveals that errors are distributed in a very non-random
fashion. Certain positions within proteins appear to be much
more error-prone than others, and certain proteins appear to
be relatively protected from errors. The fact that the majority of
errors observed here are attributed to mispairing between co-
dons and anti-codons suggests that there exists a ‘‘ﬁdelity
code’’ for the ribosome that determines the probability of error
and type of misincorporation that can occur at each position.
The fact that the ribosome was shown here to be translating
more rapidly at sites of error, that codon identity dictates errors,
the observation that an anti-ribosome drug affected the error
pattern, and the observation that error sites are more rapidly
evolving and less sensitive thermodynamically to mutations all
suggest that the propensity to make translation errors and the
type of errors made are programmed into genes’ sequences.
Together, these analyses reveal that translation errors have a
clear mechanistic basis and that their propensity is subject to
evolutionary selection.
Examining the error patterns across diverse perturbations re-
vealed a physiological context of translation ﬁdelity. We exam-
ined the proteome-wide error spectra at various stages of the
growth cycle, upon depletion of particular amino acids, when
bacteria encounter anti-ribosomal antibiotics and when a key
component of the misfolding response gene is compromised.
Each of these perturbations revealed a change in the amount,
rate, and type of revealed translation errors, suggesting that
translation inﬁdelity is a central constraint that characterizes
physiology under many life conditions. An exciting possibility is
that genes are programmed to make particular errors and that
they use errors to regulate gene expression, similar to stochastic
RNA editing (Bar-Yaacov et al., 2017, 2018).
Our experiments with amino acid depletion indicate that the
economy of amino acids in the cell can affect quality control dur-
ing aminoacylation. This conclusion follows from our observation
of changes in error patterns involving a given amino acid when
that amino acid is depleted from the medium. Together with pre-
vious ﬁndings showing that oxidation levels in the cell affect the
accuracy of tRNA aminoacylation quality control (Ling and Soll,
2010), the picture that now emerges is that diverse factors play
a role in determining acylation error rates and patterns.
Our analyses of translation errors could be discussed in the
same context as that of noise in gene expression (Bar-Even
et al., 2006; Newman et al., 2006; Eldar and Elowitz, 2010; Ba-
la´ zsi et al., 2011). The study of noise in gene expression
brought the realization that genetically identical cells can
express the same protein at different levels. These studies re-
vealed how cells govern noise levels in different genes the im-
plications of noise for physiology and evolution. Analyses of
noise in gene expression revealed several key properties: (1)
noise scales with gene expression; (2) the propensity for noise
differs between genes, e.g., stress-related genes are more
noisy than genes encoding structural proteins; and (3) noise
levels are programmed into genes sequences. In parallel to
‘‘protein quantitative noise,’’ the current study reveals ‘‘protein
sequence noise;’’ i.e., translation errors. Both noise sources
appear to be regulated by cells in a gene-speciﬁc fashion;
most essential and highly expressed genes are protected
from both quantitative or sequence noise, whereas rapidly
evolving genes or less sensitive positions within genes are
more free to display the two types of randomness. For the
two manifestations of randomness, an exciting possibility is
that randomness generates diversity among genetically iden-
tical cells, a state that could be essential under certain life
conditions.
438
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019


--- Page 14 ---
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
d METHOD DETAILS
B Proteome extraction
B Sample preparation, HPLC and Mass Spectrometry
B Raw ﬁle processing
B The Dependent Peptide search
B DP identiﬁcations ﬁltering
B Error rate quantiﬁcation
B Assignment of NeCE to their most likely nucleotide
mismatch
B Evolutionary rates computation
B Effect of substitutions on protein stability
B Deep sequencing of the tRNA pool in E. coli
B Ribosome density computation
d DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
molcel.2019.06.041.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Y.P. thanks the European Research Council, European Union (Grant ID:
616622); Israel Science Foundation, Israel (Grant ID: 1332/14); Israel
Cancer Research Foundation, Israel (Grant ID: 18-205-AG), and Minerva
Foundation, Germany (Grant ID: AZ 5746940763) for grant support. Y.P.
is an incumbent of the Ben May Professorial Chair. A.B.L. thanks the
Axa Foundation Chair on Longevity and the Bettencourt Schueller Founda-
tion. T.G. thanks the Israel Science Foundation, and Israel Center of
Research Excellence Program (I-CORE, Gene Regulation in Complex
Human Disease Centre No. 41/11). We thank Alon Savidor and Yishai
Levin from the Mass Spectrometry unit at INCPM for performing mass
spectrometry experiments. We thank Naama Knafo for assistance with
MS measurements.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
E.M., T.G., A.B.L., and Y.P. conceived the study. T.G. supervised the prote-
omics and mass spectrometry experimental strategy. O.D. designed and
supervised the physiological experiments. J.C. devised the application of
MaxQuant to this study. E.M. ran all analyses. E.M. and O.A. performed
computational analyses. E.M., O.D., A.Y., and G.D.B. performed the experi-
ments. R.R. performed tRNA sequencing and computational analyses. E.M.,
O.D., T.G., A.B.L., and Y.P. wrote the paper. T.G., A.B.L., and Y.P. supervised
the study.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: November 7, 2018
Revised: March 5, 2019
Accepted: June 26, 2019
Published: July 25, 2019
REFERENCES
Baba, T., Ara, T., Hasegawa, M., Takai, Y., Okumura, Y., Baba, M., Datsenko,
K.A., Tomita, M., Wanner, B.L., and Mori, H. (2006). Construction of
Escherichia coli K-12 in-frame, single-gene knockout mutants: The Keio
collection. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2, 2006.0008.
Bala´ zsi, G., van Oudenaarden, A., and Collins, J.J. (2011). Cellular decision
making and biological noise: from microbes to mammals. Cell 144, 910–925.
Banerjee, K., Kolomeisky, A.B., and Igoshin, O.A. (2017). Elucidating interplay
of speed and accuracy in biological error correction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A 114, 5183–5188.
Bar-Even, A., Paulsson, J., Maheshri, N., Carmi, M., O’Shea, E., Pilpel, Y., and
Barkai, N. (2006). Noise in protein expression scales with natural protein abun-
dance. Nat. Genet. 38, 636–643.
Bar-Yaacov, D., Mordret, E., Towers, R., Biniashvili, T., Soyris, C., Schwartz,
S., Dahan, O., and Pilpel, Y. (2017). RNA editing in bacteria recodes multiple
proteins and regulates an evolutionarily conserved toxin-antitoxin system.
Genome Res. 27, 1696–1703.
Bar-Yaacov, D., Pilpel, Y., and Dahan, O. (2018). RNA editing in bacteria:
occurrence, regulation and signiﬁcance. RNA Biol. 15, 863–867.
Bratulic, S., Toll-Riera, M., and Wagner, A. (2017). Mistranslation can enhance
ﬁtness through purging of deleterious mutations. Nat. Commun. 8, 15410.
Chen, W.-H., Lu, G., Bork, P., Hu, S., and Lercher, M.J. (2016). Energy efﬁ-
ciency trade-offs drive nucleotide usage in transcribed regions. Nat.
Commun. 7, 11334.
Conticello, S.G., Pilpel, Y., Glusman, G., and Fainzilber, M. (2000). Position-
speciﬁc codon conservation in hypervariable gene families. Trends Genet.
16, 57–59.
Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identiﬁcation
rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide pro-
tein quantiﬁcation. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372.
Cvetesic, N., Semanjski, M., Souﬁ, B., Krug, K., Gruic-Sovulj, I., and Macek, B.
(2016). Proteome-wide measurement of non-canonical bacterial mistransla-
tion by quantitative mass spectrometry of protein modiﬁcations. Sci. Rep.
6, 28631.
dos Reis, M., Savva, R., and Wernisch, L. (2004). Solving the riddle of codon
usage preferences: a test for translational selection. Nucleic Acids Res. 32,
5036–5044.
Drummond, D.A., and Wilke, C.O. (2008). Mistranslation-induced protein mis-
folding as a dominant constraint on coding-sequence evolution. Cell 134,
341–352.
Drummond, D.A., and Wilke, C.O. (2009). The evolutionary consequences of
erroneous protein synthesis. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10, 715–724.
Edelmann, P., and Gallant, J. (1977). Mistranslation in E. coli. Cell 10, 131–137.
Edgar, R.C. (2004). MUSCLE: Multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy
and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 1792–1797.
Eldar, A., and Elowitz, M.B. (2010). Functional roles for noise in genetic circuits.
Nature 467, 167–173.
Elf, J., Nilsson, D., Tenson, T., and Ehrenberg, M. (2003). Selective charging of
tRNA
isoacceptors
explains
patterns
of
codon
usage.
Science
300,
1718–1722.
Elias, J.E., and Gygi, S.P. (2007). Target-decoy search strategy for increased
conﬁdence in large-scale protein identiﬁcations by mass spectrometry. Nat.
Methods 4, 207–214.
Frumkin, I., Lajoie, M.J., Gregg, C.J., Hornung, G., Church, G.M., and Pilpel, Y.
(2018). Codon usage of highly expressed genes affects proteome-wide trans-
lation efﬁciency. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E4940–E4949.
Galperin, M.Y., Makarova, K.S., Wolf, Y.I., and Koonin, E.V. (2015). Expanded
microbial genome coverage and improved protein family annotation in the
COG database. Nucleic Acids Res. 43 (Database issue, D1), D261–D269.
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019
439


--- Page 15 ---
Goloborodko, A.A., Levitsky, L.I., Ivanov, M.V., and Gorshkov, M.V. (2013).
Pyteomics–a Python framework for exploratory data analysis and rapid soft-
ware prototyping in proteomics. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 24, 301–304.
Gromadski, K.B., and Rodnina, M.V. (2004). Streptomycin interferes with
conformational coupling between codon recognition and GTPase activation
on the ribosome. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 11, 316–322.
Heinz, S., Benner, C., Spann, N., Bertolino, E., Lin, Y.C., Laslo, P., Cheng, J.X.,
Murre, C., Singh, H., and Glass, C.K. (2010). Simple Combinations of Lineage-
Determining Transcription Factors Prime cis-Regulatory Elements Required
for Macrophage and B Cell Identities. Molecular Cell 38, 576–589, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004.
Hopﬁeld, J.J. (1974). Kinetic Proofreading: A New Mechanism for Reducing
Errors in Biosynthetic Processes Requiring High Speciﬁcity. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A 71, 4135–4139.
Ingolia, N.T. (2016). Ribosome Footprint Proﬁling of Translation throughout the
Genome. Cell 165, 22–33.
Johansson, M., Zhang, J., and Ehrenberg, M. (2012). Genetic code translation
displays a linear trade-off between efﬁciency and accuracy of tRNA selection.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 131–136.
Jones, T.E., Alexander, R.W., and Pan, T. (2011). Misacylation of speciﬁc non-
methionyl tRNAs by a bacterial methionyl-tRNA synthetase. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A 108, 6933–6938.
Kapur, M., and Ackerman, S.L. (2018). mRNA Translation Gone Awry:
Translation Fidelity and Neurological Disease. Trends Genet. 34, 218–231.
Khan, Z., Amini, S., Bloom, J.S., Ruse, C., Caudy, A.A., Kruglyak, L., Singh, M.,
Perlman, D.H., and Tavazoie, S. (2011). Accurate proteome-wide protein
quantiﬁcation from high-resolution 15N mass spectra. Genome Biol. 12, R122.
Kramer, E.B., and Farabaugh, P.J. (2007). The frequency of translational
misreading errors in E. coli is largely determined by tRNA competition. RNA
13, 87–96.
Kramer, E.B., Vallabhaneni, H., Mayer, L.M., and Farabaugh, P.J. (2010). A
comprehensive analysis of translational missense errors in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. RNA 16, 1797–1808.
Kulak, N.A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2014). Minimal,
encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estima-
tion in eukaryotic cells. Nat. Methods 11, 319–324.
Langmead, B., and Salzberg, S.L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with
Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 9, 357–359, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1923.
Lee, J.W., Beebe, K., Nangle, L.A., Jang, J., Longo-Guess, C.M., Cook, S.A.,
Davisson, M.T., Sundberg, J.P., Schimmel, P., and Ackerman, S.L. (2006).
Editing-defective tRNA synthetase causes protein misfolding and neurode-
generation. Nature 443, 50–55.
Lee, H., Popodi, E., Tang, H., and Foster, P.L. (2012). Rate and molecular
spectrum of spontaneous mutations in the bacterium Escherichia coli as deter-
mined by whole-genome sequencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 109,
E2774–E2783.
Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N., Marth, G.,
Abecasis, G., and Durbin, R.; 1000 Genome Project Data Processing
Subgroup (2009). The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools.
Bioinformatics
25,
2078–2079,
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btp352.
Lindner, A.B., and Demarez, A. (2009). Protein aggregation as a paradigm of
aging. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1790, 980–996.
Ling, J., and Soll, D. (2010). Severe oxidative stress induces protein mistrans-
lation through impairment of an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase editing site. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 107, 4028–4033.
Lowe, T.M., and Chan, P.P. (2016). tRNAscan-SE On-line: integrating search
and context for analysis of transfer RNA genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 44 (W1).
W54-7. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw413.
Marx, H., Lemeer, S., Schliep, J.E., Matheron, L., Mohammed, S., Cox, J.,
Mann, M., Heck, A.J., and Kuster, B. (2013). A large synthetic peptide and
phosphopeptide reference library for mass spectrometry-based proteomics.
Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 557–564.
Miranda, I., Silva-Dias, A., Rocha, R., Teixeira-Santos, R., Coelho, C.,
Gonc¸ alves, T., Santos, M.A., Pina-Vaz, C., Solis, N.V., Filler, S.G., and
Rodrigues, A.G. (2013). Candida albicans CUG mistranslation is a mechanism
to create cell surface variation. MBio 4, e00285–e13.
Moruz, L., and K€all, L. (2017). Peptide retention time prediction. Mass
Spectrom. Rev. 36, 615–623.
Na, S., Bandeira, N., and Paek, E. (2012). Fast Multi-blind Modiﬁcation Search
through Tandem Mass Spectrometry. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 11, M111.010199.
Netzer, N., Goodenbour, J.M., David, A., Dittmar, K.A., Jones, R.B., Schneider,
J.R., Boone, D., Eves, E.M., Rosner, M.R., Gibbs, J.S., et al. (2009). Innate im-
mune and chemically triggered oxidative stress modiﬁes translational ﬁdelity.
Nature 462, 522–526.
Newman, J.R., Ghaemmaghami, S., Ihmels, J., Breslow, D.K., Noble, M.,
DeRisi, J.L., and Weissman, J.S. (2006). Single-cell proteomic analysis of S.
cerevisiae reveals the architecture of biological noise. Nature 441, 840–846.
Ninio, J. (1975). Kinetic ampliﬁcation of enzyme discrimination. Biochimie 57,
587–595.
Perez-Riverol, Y., Csordas, A., Bai, J., Bernal-Llinares, M., Hewapathirana, S.,
Kundu, D.J., Inuganti, A., Griss, J., Mayer, G., Eisenacher, M., et al. (2019). The
PRIDE database and related tools and resources in 2019. improving support
for quantiﬁcation data. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D442–D450.
Powers, E.T., Powers, D.L., and Gierasch, L.M. (2012). FoldEco: a model for
proteostasis in E. coli. Cell Rep. 1, 265–276.
Pupko, T., Bell, R.E., Mayrose, I., Glaser, F., and Ben-Tal, N. (2002). Rate4Site:
An algorithmic tool for the identiﬁcation of functional regions in proteins by sur-
face
mapping
of
evolutionary
determinants
within
their
homologues.
Bioinformatics, S71–S77.
Quinlan, A.R., and Hall, I.M. (2010). BEDTools: a ﬂexible suite of utilities for
comparing genomic features. Bioinformatics 6, 841–842, https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btq033.
Rak, R., Dahan, O., and Pilpel, Y. (2018). Repertoires of tRNAs: The Couplers of
Genomics and Proteomics. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 34, 239–264.
Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y., and Mann, M. (2003). Stop and go extraction tips
for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS
sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal. Chem. 75, 663–670.
Savitski, M.M., Nielsen, M.L., and Zubarev, R.A. (2006). ModiﬁComb, a new
proteomic tool for mapping substoichiometric post-translational modiﬁca-
tions, ﬁnding novel types of modiﬁcations, and ﬁngerprinting complex protein
mixtures. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 5, 935–948.
Schymkowitz, J., Borg, J., Stricher, F., Nys, R., Rousseau, F., and Serrano, L.
(2005). The FoldX web server: an online force ﬁeld. Nucleic Acids Res. 33 (Web
Server issue, SUPPL. 2), W382-8.
Sinitcyn, P., Rudolph, J.D., and Cox, J. (2018). Computational Methods for
Understanding Mass Spectrometry–Based Shotgun Proteomics Data 1,
207–234.
Sun, L., Gomes, A.C., He, W., Zhou, H., Wang, X., Pan, D.W., Schimmel, P.,
Pan, T., and Yang, X.L. (2016). Evolutionary Gain of Alanine Mischarging to
Noncognate tRNAs with a G4:U69 Base Pair. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138,
12948–12955.
Traverse, C.C., and Ochman, H. (2016). Conserved rates and patterns of tran-
scription errors across bacterial growth states and lifestyles. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 113, 3311–3316.
Tsur, D., Tanner, S., Zandi, E., Bafna, V., and Pevzner, P.A. (2005).
Identiﬁcation of post-translational modiﬁcations by blind search of mass
spectra. Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1562–1567.
Wang, M., Herrmann, C.J., Simonovic, M., Szklarczyk, D., and von Mering, C.
(2015). Version 4.0 of PaxDb: Protein abundance data, integrated across
model organisms, tissues, and cell-lines. Proteomics 15, 3163–3168.
Whitehead, D.J., Wilke, C.O., Vernazobres, D., and Bornberg-Bauer, E. (2008).
The look-ahead effect of phenotypic mutations. Biol. Direct 3, 18.
440
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019


--- Page 16 ---
Wiltrout, E., Goodenbour, J.M., Fre´ chin, M., and Pan, T. (2012). Misacylation of
tRNA with methionine in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res. 40,
10494–10506.
Wisniewski, J.R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2009). Universal
sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat. Methods 6, 359–362.
Wohlgemuth, I., Pohl, C., Mittelstaet, J., Konevega, A.L., and Rodnina, M.V.
(2011). Evolutionary optimization of speed and accuracy of decoding on the
ribosome. Philos. Trans. R Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 366, 2979–2986.
Woolstenhulme, C.J., Guydosh, N.R., Green, R., and Buskirk, A.R. (2015).
High-precision analysis of translational pausing by ribosome proﬁling in bacte-
ria lacking EFP. Cell Rep. 11, 13–21.
Yang, J.R., Chen, X., and Zhang, J. (2014). Codon-by-Codon Modulation of
Translational Speed and Accuracy Via mRNA Folding. PLoS Biol. 12,
e1001910.
Zhang, Z., Shah, B., and Bondarenko, P.V. (2013). G/U and certain wobble po-
sition mismatches as possible main causes of amino acid misincorporations.
Biochemistry 52, 8165–8176.
Zheng, G., Qin, Y., Clark, W.C., Dai, Q., Yi, C., He, C., Lambowitz, A.M., and
Pan, T. (2015). Efﬁcient and quantitative high-throughput tRNA sequencing.
Nat. Methods 12, 835–837.
Zhu, Y.O., Siegal, M.L., Hall, D.W., and Petrov, D.A. (2014). Precise estimates
of mutation rate and spectrum in yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 111,
E2310–E2318.
Zhu, M., Dai, X., and Wang, Y.-P. (2016). Real time determination of bacterial
in vivo ribosome translation elongation speed based on LacZa complementa-
tion system. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, e155.
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441, August 8, 2019
441


--- Page 17 ---
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Bacterial and Virus Strains
E.coli: strain MG1655
ATCC stock center
Cat #: 47076
E.coli: strain BW25113
CGSC stock Center
Cat #: 7636
E.coli: strain JW2880-1
CGSC stock Center
Cat #: 10234
E.coli: strain JW0233-2
CGSC stock Center
Cat#: 8468
E.coli: strain JW3745-2
CGSC stock Center
Cat#: 10733
E.coli: strain JW0429-1
CGSC stock Center
Cat#: 8592
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
MOPS rich deﬁned medium
Teknova
Cat#: M2105
Serine methyl ester
Sigma
Cat #: 412201
Proline methyl ester
Sigma
Cat #: 287067
Isoleucine methyl ester
Sigma
Cat #: 58920
B-PER Bacterial Protein Extraction Reagent
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#: 78248
TRI-reagent
Sigma
Cat#: T9424
Agencourt AMPure XP
Beckman Coulter
Cat#: A63881
AlkB wt and D135S
Zheng et al., 2015
N/A
TGIRT-III
InGex
Cat#: TGIRT50
T4 RNA ligase
New England Biolabs
Cat#: M0204L
Dynabeads myOne SILANE
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#: 37002D
NEBNext PCR mix
New England Biolabs
Cat#: M0541L
Trypsin
Promega
Cat#: V5113
C18 StageTip
Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#: 14-386-2
Deposited Data
Raw and analyzed mass spectrometry data
This paper
PRIDE: PXD014341
Raw and analyzed tRNA data
This paper
GEO: GSE128812
E. coli reference genome ASM584v2
Genome Reference Consortium
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/
GCA_000005845.2#/st
E. coli tRNA sequences
Lowe and Chan, 2016
http://gtrnadb.ucsc.edu/genomes/bacteria/
Esch_coli_K_12_MG1655/
E. coli reference CDS
European Nucleotide Archive
http://bacteria.ensembl.org/Escherichia_coli_
str_k_12_substr_mg1655/Info/Index
E. coli reference proteome
UNIPROT
https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000625
Saccharomyces cerevisiae raw mass
spectrometry ﬁles
PRIDE
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/
PXD000269
Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference CDS
Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference proteome
UNIPROT
https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311
Oligonucleotides
Primer for tRNA reverse-transcription
This paper
N/A
DNA
50-CACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTT 30
RNA
50-
rArGrArUrCrGrGrArArGrArGrCrGrUrCrGrUr
G-30
30 adaptor for tRNA library ligation 50- AGATCG
GAAGAGCACA-30
This paper
N/A
(Continued on next page)
e1
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441.e1–e5, August 8, 2019


--- Page 18 ---
LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Yitzhak
Pilpel (pilpel@weizmann.ac.il)
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
To generate the E. coli drug dataset, E. coli strain MG1655 (Genotype: F-, lambda-, rph-1, ‘‘ATCC: 47076’’) was grown in 3ml LB me-
dia (10 g/l tryptone, 5g/l yeast extract, and 10 g/l NaCl) at 30C until reaching stationary phase. Cultures were diluted 1:100 and grown
aerobically in 100ml LB with and without addition paromomycin (ﬁnal concentration of 5 mg/ml). Cultures were grown in standard
Erlenmeyer at 37C, shaking speed of 200rpm until reaching mid-log phase (OD x 0.5). Each experiment was done in two indepen-
dent biological repeats.
To generate amino acids depletion dataset, cells were grown in of 3ml of modiﬁed MOPS rich deﬁned medium made with the
following recipe: 10X MOPS rich buffer, 10X ACGU nucleobase stock and 100X 0.132M K2HPO4 (Teknova, Cat.#: M2105) were
used at 1X ﬁnal concentration. Medium was supplemented with 0.25% glucose as carbon source, 104% thiamine, 17.2mM Serine,
640mM Lysine, 661mM Arginine, 592mM Histidine, 464mM Tyrosine and 800mM of all 15 remaining amino acids. pH was adjusted to 7.4
using 1M NaOH. Cultures were grown at 37C until reaching stationary phase. Cells were then diluted 1:1000 into the appropriate
media (see details below) and grown at 37C. The exact strains, media, growth conditions and growth phase in which samples
were taken in the different depletion experiments were:
d Serine depletion: BW25113 (WT) strain was grown in modiﬁed MOPS rich deﬁned medium and JW2880-1 (DserA) strain was
grown in modiﬁed MOPS deﬁned medium depleted for amino acid serine (8.6mM Serine and 800mM Serine methyl ester (Sigma
Cat#: 412201)). Cultures were grown in standard Erlenmeyers, shaking speed of 200rpm and samples were taken at 3 time
points during culture growth (see Figure S4 for exact harvesting times and OD values). Each experiment was done in two
independent biological repeats.
d Proline depletion: BW25113 (WT) strain was grown in modiﬁed MOPS rich deﬁned medium and JW0233-2 (DproA) strain was
grown in either modiﬁed MOPS rich deﬁned medium or modiﬁed MOPS deﬁned medium depleted for amino acid proline (0mM
Proline and 160mM Proline methyl ester (Sigma Cat#: 287067)). Cultures were grown in bafﬂed Erlenmeyers to increase aera-
tion, shaking speed of 200rpm and samples were taken at a single time point at stationary phase (‘‘t1 stationary’’). Each exper-
iment was done in three independent biological repeats.
d Isoleucine depletion: BW25113 (WT) strain was grown in modiﬁed MOPS rich deﬁned medium and JW3745-2 (DilvA) strain was
grown in either modiﬁed MOPS rich deﬁned medium or modiﬁed MOPS deﬁned medium depleted for amino acid isoleucine
(100mM Isoleucine and 160mM Isoleucine methyl ester (Sigma Cat#: 58920)). Cultures were grown in bafﬂed Erlenmeyers to
increase aeration, shaking speed of 200rpm and samples were taken at a single time point at stationary phase (‘‘t1 stationary’’).
Each experiment was done in three independent biological repeats.
To generate the protease deletion dataset, BW25113 (WT) strain as well JW0429-1 (Dlon) strain were grown in 3ml of modiﬁed
MOPS rich deﬁned medium at 37C until reaching stationary phase. Cells were then diluted 1:1000 into the same media. Cultures
were grown in bafﬂed Erlenmeyers, shaking speed of 200rpm to increase aeration and samples were taken at a single time point
at stationary phase (‘‘t1 stationary’’). Each experiment was done in three independent biological repeats. All auxotrophs, lon mutant,
as well as the corresponding wild-type were obtained from the Keio deletion library (Baba et al., 2006).
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Software and Algorithms
Custom python scripts
This paper
https://github.com/ernestmordret/substitutions/
Bowtie2
Langmead and Salzberg, 2012
http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/
index.shtml
Samtools
Li et al., 2009
http://samtools.sourceforge.net/
homertools
Heinz et al., 2010
http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/download.html
Bedtools
Quinlan and Hall, 2010
https://github.com/arq5x/bedtools2/releases
MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1.
Cox and Mann, 2008
http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?
id=maxquant:common:download_and_installation
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441.e1–e5, August 8, 2019
e2


--- Page 19 ---
METHOD DETAILS
Proteome extraction
We adapted our proteome extraction protocol from Khan et al. (2011). Bacterial cultures were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 min, and
washed twice with 10ml PBS. Remaining PBS was vacuum-aspirated and the pellets were frozen in ethanol-dry ice and stored
at 80C until protein extraction. For protein extraction, pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL of B-PER bacterial protein extraction
buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), and vortexed vigorously for 1 min. The extract was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min. The super-
natants (high solubility fractions) were collected and frozen in an ethanol-dry ice bath. High solubility fractions were stored at 80C.
The remaining pellets were re-suspended in 2 mL of 1:10 diluted B-PER reagent. The suspensions were centrifuged and washed one
more time with 1:10 diluted B- PER reagent. The pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL of Inclusion Body Solubilization Reagent (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc). The suspensions were vortexed for 1 min, shaken for 30 min, and placed in a sonication bath for 10 min at maximum
intensity. Cell debris were removed from the suspension by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatants were frozen in
an ethanol-dry ice bath (low solubility fraction), and stored at 80C.
Sample preparation, HPLC and Mass Spectrometry
400 mg of protein was taken for Filter aided sample preparation (FASP)(Wisniewski et al., 2009) trypsin digestion on top of 30kDa
Microcon ﬁltration devices (Millipore). Proteins were digested overnight at 37C and the peptides were separated into ﬁve fractions
using strong cation exchange (SCX) in a StageTip format. Peptides were puriﬁed and concentrated on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber,
Ishihama and Mann, 2003) (3M EmporeTM, St. Paul, MN, USA). Liquid-chromatography on the EASY-nLC1000 HPLC was coupled to
high-resolution mass spectrometric analysis on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA,
USA). Peptides were separated on 50 cm EASY-spray columns (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) with a 140 min gradient of water and aceto-
nitrile. MS acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode with selection of the top 10 peptides from each MS spectrum for
fragmentation and analysis.
Raw ﬁle processing
High and Low solubility fractions were aligned separately using MaxQuant. The amino acid substitutions identiﬁcation procedure re-
lies on the built-in dependent peptide algorithm of MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008; Sinitcyn et al., 2018).
The Dependent Peptide search
Experimental spectra were ﬁrst searched using a standard database search algorithm, without any variable modiﬁcation, and the
signiﬁcance of identiﬁcations was controlled to a 1% FDR via a target decoy procedure. Identiﬁed spectra are then turned into a
spectral library, and a decoy spectral library is created by reversing the sequences of the identiﬁed spectra. For each
possible pair consisting of an identiﬁed spectrum in the concatenated spectral libraries and an unidentiﬁed experimental spectrum
of the same charge, and recorded in the same raw ﬁle, we apply the following steps: ﬁrst we compute the mass shift Dm by
subtracting the mass of the identiﬁed (unmodiﬁed) spectrum to that of the unidentiﬁed (modiﬁed) spectrum, then we simulate
modiﬁed versions of the theoretical spectrum by adding in silico this mass shift at every position along the peptide, and ﬁnally we
evaluate the match between the theoretical spectrum and the experimental spectrum using a formula similar to Andromeda’s
binomial score.
For each unidentiﬁed peptide, the match with the best score is reported, the nature of the match (target or decoy) is recorded, and a
target-decoy procedure (Elias and Gygi, 2007) is applied to keep the FDR at 1%. Peptides identiﬁed using this procedure are called
Dependent Peptides (DP), whereas their unmodiﬁed counterparts are named Base Peptides (BP).
Additionally, the conﬁdence of the mass shift’s localization is estimated using a method similar to MaxQuant/Andromeda’s PTM
Score strategy, which returns the probability that the modiﬁcation is harbored by any of the peptide’s amino acid.
DP identiﬁcations ﬁltering
The list of all known modiﬁcations was downloaded from http://www.unimod.org/, and those marked as AA substitution, Isotopic
label or Chemical derivative were excluded. Entries in this list are characterized by a monoisotopic mass shift, and a site speciﬁcity
(i.e., they can only occur on a speciﬁc amino acid or on peptides’ and proteins’ termini). We removed from our analysis any DP iden-
tiﬁcation that could be explained by any of the remaining modiﬁcations, using the following criteria: the recorded Dm and the known
modiﬁcation’s mass shift must not differ by more than 0.01 Da, and the modiﬁcation must be harbored by a site consistent with the
uniprot entry with a probability p R 0.05. Conversely, we computed the list of all possible amino acid substitutions and their asso-
ciated mass shifts. For every substitution, we only retained DP identiﬁcations such that the observed Dm and the AA substitution’s
mass shift did not differ by more than 0.005 Da, and the mass shift was localized on the substitution’s original AA with p R 0.95.
Among the remaining DP identiﬁcations, those such that the peptide sequence after substitution was a substring of the proteome
(allowing Ile-Leu ambiguities), were also removed, to prevent pairing of dependent peptides and base peptides between paralogs.
Finally, the FDR was controlled once again at 1% using the same procedure as above.
Next we examined the capacity of the Dependent Peptide algorithm of MaxQuant to identify known mass shifts in a well-controlled
setup. For that we used a large set of synthetic peptides and their corresponding phospho-peptide counterparts (Marx et al., 2013),
e3
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441.e1–e5, August 8, 2019


--- Page 20 ---
that was subject to LC-MS/MS measurements. This dataset constitutes a ground truth to determine the validity of the DP algorithm.
We downloaded data from the PRIDE deposition https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD000138/ﬁles. We used the Fasta
ﬁles of the whole human proteome plus the synthetic peptides. We ran MaxQuant with default settings and only oxidation of methi-
onine as variable modiﬁcation and not including phosphorylation. The dependent peptide peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were
restricted to a false discovery rate of maximally 1% using a target-decoy approach. The dependent peptide algorithm found 1,315
PSMs whose modiﬁcation mass corresponds to a singly phosphorylated peptide with 1% FDR on dependent peptides. Among these
were neither decoy hits, nor wrongly identiﬁed peptides, indicating that the dependent peptides strategy employed in the present
work is highly speciﬁc and efﬁcient in limiting false positive identiﬁcations.
Error rate quantiﬁcation
In order to assess the error rate, we quantify and compare pairs of base and dependent peptides across many samples. For
each independent substitution, we fetched the quantiﬁcation proﬁle of the base peptide from MaxQuant’s peptides.txt table, and
similarly fetch the dependent peptide’s quantiﬁcation proﬁle from the matchedFeatures.txt table. Whenever a peak has been de-
tected and quantiﬁed for both the dependent and the base peptide, we estimate the translation error rate as the ratio of their
MS1 intensities.
Assignment of NeCE to their most likely nucleotide mismatch
The assignment of observed substitutions to appropriate anticodons, done here in order to determine underlying mismatch type, was
carried out in two steps. First, substitutions that could unambiguously result from a mispairing of a single tRNA type were counted,
and probabilities of base-to-base mispairing were obtained; then, substitutions that could have been explained by utilizing more than
one tRNA type were addressed by considering the prior base-to-base substitutions derived from the unambiguous cases. When two
or more tRNA molecules could explain a given substitution, and existing priors were missing, we have distributed with equal prob-
ability the observations among all possible mismatch types. The procedure was repeated until convergence.
Evolutionary rates computation
For each of the proteins associated to a substitution in the MOPS dataset, we fetched a list of orthologous protein sequences from the
COG database (Galperin et al., 2015), excluding partial matches (membership class = 3). Proteins whose list of orthologs contained
less than 50 sequences were excluded from this analysis. For the remaining proteins, we randomly selected 50 sequences from the
list, and created evolutionary alignments using MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004). The alignments were then used to compute normalized evolu-
tionary rates per site with the rate4site program (Pupko et al., 2002). The mean evolutionary rate of sites associated with detected
substitutions was compared to that of a 1,000 randomly sampled positions, using the strategy described in Figure 6A.
Effect of substitutions on protein stability
For each of the proteins associated to a substitution in the MOPS dataset, we attempted to fetch the best 3D structure for its bio-
logical assembly in the PDB database to estimate the effect of our substitutions on protein stability using the FoldX software (Schym-
kowitz et al., 2005). We excluded membrane proteins, whose stability is poorly modeled by FoldX, and excluded ribosomal protein
because the ribosome is too big to be modeled entirely. We restricted our analysis to WT proteins from E. coli, excluding structures
determined from orthologs. Among the remaining structures, we selected those with the lowest R-free score.
These structures were ﬁrst ‘‘repaired’’ using the repairPDB command. We then evaluated the effect of a set of amino acid
substitutions comprising the detected substitutions and the controls described in Figure 6D on protein stability (DDG), using the
PositionScan command. Finally, the mean(DDG) of our set of substitutions was compared to the mean(DDG) of 1000 randomly
sampled substitutions, using the strategy described in Figure 6D.
Deep sequencing of the tRNA pool in E. coli
Bacterial cultures were grown to OD values roughly corresponding to exponential phase (OD 0.8), late exponential phase (OD 1.9),
and stationary phase (OD 2.3), experiment was done in three biological repeats. Culttures were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 1 min,
frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 80 C until RNA extraction. RNA was extracted using TRI-reagent (Sigma-Aldirch), according
to standard protocol. tRNA sequencing protocol was adapted from Zheng et al., 2015 (Zheng et al., 2015) with minor modiﬁcation.
Small RNA was isolated using SPRI-beads (Agencourt AMPure XP, Beckman Coulter), using dual side size-selection protocol. First
RNA and beads were mixed at 1:1.8 ratio, and supernatant was collected. The small RNA was isolated by mixing the clear superna-
tant with bead at 1:0.8 ratio, with addition of X1.34 isopropanol. Small RNA was treated for modiﬁcation removal using AlkB wt, and
D135S enzymes, a kind gift from Prof. Tao Pan. Reverse transcription was done using TGIRT-III enzyme, with the indicated DNA-RNA
hybrid primer. 30 adaptor was ligated to the cDNA using T4 ligase (NEB). The cDNA was puriﬁed using Dynabeads myOne SILANE (life
Technologies) after each step. The library was ampliﬁed using NEBNext PCR mix and cleaned using SPRI-beads. Samples were
pooled and sequenced using NextSeq illumina.
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441.e1–e5, August 8, 2019
e4


--- Page 21 ---
Read were trimmed using homerTool. Alignment was done to the genome and mature tRNA using Bowtie2 with parameters–very-
sensitive-local. Read aligned with equal alignment score to the genome and mature tRNA were annotated as mature tRNA. Reads
aligned to multiple tRNA genes were randomly assigned when mapping to identical anticodon, and discarded from the analysis if
aligned to different anticodon. Read count was done using BedTools-coverage count.
Ribosome density computation
Ribosome proﬁling data for the MOPS complete experiments were downloaded from Woolstenhulme et al. (2015) (‘‘GEO:
GSM1572266, GSM1572267’’). Reads were aligned using the 30 mapping method described in the corresponding article, and shifted
by 12 nt to obtain the density at the A-site. Read counts from both replicates were summed to obtain more robust estimates, and 20
codons were excluded from both the 30 and the 50 ends to avoid known biases. For the remaining positions, we applied the trans-
formation x: log2(x + 1) to stabilize the variance, and standardized the resulting score to obtain the normalized read density
(NRD), so that the mean of the NRD per protein is 0 and its standard deviation is 1. The mean(NRD) of the set of observed substitutions
was then compared to that of 1000 randomly sampled substitutions, using the strategy described in Figure 6A.
DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
Raw ﬁles were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.5.1. Resulting ﬁles were processed using a custom pipeline written in Python. The
parameters ﬁle for MaxQuant and the scripts can be found at https://github.com/ernestmordret/substitutions/.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol
et al., 2019) partner repository. The accession number for the mass spectrometry protemoics data reported in this paper is PRIDE:
PXD014341.
The tRNA sequencing data have been deposited in GEO. The accession number for the tRNA sequences reported in this paper is
GEO: GSE128812.
Primer name
Primer sequence
Reverse-transcription DNA
50-CACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTT 30
Reverse-transcription RNA
50-rArGrArUrCrGrGrArArGrArGrCrGrUrCrGrUrG-30
30 adaptor
50- AGATCGGAAGAGCACA-30
e5
Molecular Cell 75, 427–441.e1–e5, August 8, 2019
