--- Page 1 ---
Theory
An Evolutionarily Conserved
Mechanism for Controlling the
Efﬁciency of Protein Translation
Tamir Tuller,1,2,5 Asaf Carmi,1,5 Kalin Vestsigian,3 Sivan Navon,1 Yuval Dorfan,1 John Zaborske,4 Tao Pan,4
Orna Dahan,1 Itay Furman,1 and Yitzhak Pilpel1,*
1Department of Molecular Genetics
2Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
3Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
5These authors contributed equally to this work
*Correspondence: pilpel@weizmann.ac.il
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.031
SUMMARY
Recent years have
seen
intensive
progress
in
measuring protein translation. However, the contri-
butions of coding sequences to the efﬁciency of the
process remain unclear. Here, we identify a univer-
sally conserved proﬁle of translation efﬁciency along
mRNAs computed based on adaptation between
coding sequences and the tRNA pool. In this proﬁle,
the ﬁrst 30–50 codons are, on average, translated
with a low efﬁciency. Additionally, in eukaryotes,
the last 50 codons show the highest efﬁciency
over the full coding sequence. The proﬁle accurately
predicts
position-dependent
ribosomal
density
along yeast genes. These data suggest that transla-
tion speed and, as a consequence, ribosomal density
are encoded by coding sequences and the tRNA
pool. We suggest that the slow ‘‘ramp’’ at the begin-
ning of mRNAs serves as a late stage of translation
initiation, forming an optimal and robust means to
reduce ribosomal trafﬁc jams, thus minimizing the
cost of protein expression.
INTRODUCTION
mRNA translation is controlled at multiple stages and by diverse
mechanisms. A major part of the control occurs at the stage of
initiation, where ribosomes are recruited to and assembled on
the mRNA, typically on the 50 untranslated region (UTR) (Ingolia
et al., 2009). The elongation phase is governed by both the
mRNA secondary structure (Gray and Hentze, 1994) and the
extent of adaptation of the coding sequence to the cellular
tRNA pool (dos Reis et al., 2004; Sharp and Li, 1987). The abun-
dance of tRNAs that correspond to the different codons in a gene
was suggested to determine the speed (Akashi, 2003; Man and
Pilpel, 2007) and accuracy (Drummond and Wilke, 2008) of trans-
lation. Thus, codons that are recognized by abundant or rare
tRNAs will be respectively referred to here as codons with high
and low efﬁciency (or as codons that are respectively highly or
lowly adapted to the tRNA pool).
Transcripts whose codons are biased toward the more abun-
dant tRNAs were found to be more highly expressed (Man and
Pilpel, 2007; Qin et al., 2004). Indeed protein expression levels
can be artiﬁcially increased by designed mutations that increase
their codon-tRNA adaptation (Arava et al., 2003; DeRisi et al.,
1997; Percudani et al., 1997; Tuller et al., 2007), pointing to a
causal relationship between codon usage and expression level.
Accordingly, the extent of adaptation between genes and the
tRNA pool in different species was found to vary in evolution
according to organisms’ lifestyle needs (Man and Pilpel, 2007).
So far, studies that gauge translation efﬁciency have mostly
considered average codon usage over entire genes (dos Reis
et al., 2004; Man and Pilpel, 2007; Sharp and Li, 1987; Tuller
et al., 2007). Such studies typically do not consider the order in
which codons with low and high translation efﬁciency appear
along the transcript. Although it was shown previously that the
extent of codon bias changes along transcripts (Qin et al.,
2004), it is not known whether gene sequences are arranged
so as to determine speciﬁc levels of speed and accuracy of
translation at various positions along transcripts. The order of
high-efﬁciency and low-efﬁciency codons along transcripts
could govern the process of translation, especially given that
multiple ribosomes are often simultaneously loaded on a given
transcript (Arava et al., 2003). Such instructions could affect
speed and processivity of translation as well as the overall cost
of protein production in cells. Such ‘‘trafﬁc rules’’ of translation
may thus be selected for during evolution.
To investigate a role for codon selection in modulating transla-
tion efﬁciency, we inspected open reading frame sequences and
tRNA repertoires in dozens of fully sequenced genomes. The
input to our computed proﬁle of translation efﬁciency consists
of coding sequences and a measure of adaptation between
codons and the various tRNAs (dos Reis et al., 2004), which
was previously shown to represent translation efﬁciency (dos
344
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 2 ---
Reis et al., 2004; Man and Pilpel, 2007; Tuller et al., 2007). We
describe a universally conserved translation efﬁciency proﬁle
that features low translation efﬁciency over the ﬁrst 30–50
codons of mRNAs. This feature is conserved in species that
represent the three domains of life. Translation efﬁciency proﬁles
of individual genes are often very noisy, yet selected subsets of
the genes in each genome display this pattern. The observed
proﬁle in the yeast S. cerevisiae accurately predicts the recently
measured ribosome density proﬁles of mRNAs in this species
(Ingolia et al., 2009). This correlation provides an indication that
codon-tRNA adaptation approximates well the speed of transla-
tion at various positions along mRNAs. This result also indicates
that ribosomal speed and hence density are encoded into genes’
sequences and the tRNA pool. We propose that the conserved
translation efﬁciency proﬁle may have been selected for in
diverse species as it minimizes ribosome trafﬁc jams and abor-
tive protein synthesis and, as a consequence, the cost of protein
expression.
RESULTS
A Universally Conserved Translation Efﬁciency Proﬁle
The translation efﬁciency proﬁle of a gene is deﬁned, for each
codon position, as the estimated availability of the tRNAs that
participate in translating that codon. The proﬁle is high at codons
that correspond to abundant tRNAs and low at codons that
correspond to rare tRNAs. In particular, we used the tRNA-adap-
tation index (tAI) to evaluate translation efﬁciency (dos Reis et al.,
2004 and Experimental Procedures) at each codon. The tAI
measure of an entire gene, developed following the classical
Codon Adaptation Index (Sharp and Li, 1987), is deﬁned as the
(geometric) average of tRNA availability values over all the
codons in the gene (see Experimental Procedures). For each
codon, the tAI considers the availability of the tRNA with the
perfectly matched anticodon along with weighted contributions
from imperfect codon-anticodon pairs, reﬂecting wobble inter-
actions. Whereas the original tAI measure is deﬁned as an
averaged value over the entire gene (Experimental Procedures,
Equation 2), here we consider separately each codon along the
sequence in what we deﬁne as the ‘‘local tAI’’ of a codon (see
Experimental Procedures, Equation 1). Table S1 (available
online) contains the local tAI value of each of the 61 types of
codons in a diversity of species.
Typically, the tAI uses the copy number of tRNA genes in the
genome as a proxy for their abundance in the cytoplasm.
Although this is a common assumption (see Extended Experi-
mental Procedures 1 and 2, Table S1, and Man and Pilpel,
2007; Percudani et al., 1997; Tuller et al., 2007), we examined it
in S. cerevisiae using a microarray dedicated to the tRNAs in
this species (Dittmar et al., 2004, 2006; Pavon-Eternod et al.,
2009; Zaborske et al., 2009). Speciﬁcally, we examined the corre-
lation between tRNA abundance and their gene copy number in
yeast cells growing on a rich medium. tRNA abundance measure-
ments were based on the Cy3 and Cy5 ﬂuorescence values of
each tRNA on the array and came from a labeling method that
relies only on the single-stranded 30NCCA in every tRNA (demon-
stration of the feasibility of the method was done by quantitative
comparison to 2D PAGE analysis of tRNAs; Dittmar et al., 2004,
2006; Pavon-Eternod et al., 2009; Zaborske et al., 2009).
We found that tRNA gene copy numbers are relatively highly
correlated with their expression levels in rich medium conditions
(r = 0.76 over 39 tRNA species, see Figure 1 and Figure S1). We
also found that this correlation remains relatively high even when
yeast undergo a major metabolic shift, termed ‘‘diauxic shift’’
(DeRisi et al., 1997), from fermenting to respiratory conditions
(correlation between 0.65 and 0.71; see also Table S1). The array
analysis indicates that the tRNA gene copy number provides
a reasonable proxy for tRNA abundance, and we thus use it, in
S. cerevisiae and in the rest of the species too, in all subsequent
tAI calculations.
We started by inspecting the averaged translation efﬁciency
proﬁles of all the genes in a given genome. To accomplish this
analysis, all genes were lined up according to their start codon,
and an average local tAI value at each position was calculated
(see Experimental Procedures). In parallel, we also lined up all
the genes in each genome relative to the stop codon and
computed the average across all genes in the last position, the
penultimate position, etc. Altogether we analyzed genomes of
27 organisms with representatives from all three domains of
life (see Table S2).
As seen in Figure 2 and Table S2 (see also Figure S1,
Figure S2, and Figure S3), in almost all species examined, the
averaged translation efﬁciency proﬁle reveals several remark-
ably conserved features. Translation starts with relatively low-
efﬁciency codons for about the ﬁrst 30–50 positions. We term
this part the ‘‘low-efﬁciency ramp’’ or the ‘‘ramp’’ for short. The
ramp region is then followed by a plateau with 5%–10% higher
translation efﬁciency on a genome average. A clear outlier in the
ramp is the second codon position, which follows the initiating
methionine that shows high efﬁciency compared to its neigh-
boring codons in the majority of the species (Figure S2). This
Figure 1. The tRNA Gene Copy Correlates with Levels of tRNA
Genes in S. cerevisiae
tRNA gene copy numbers versus the expression levels of tRNA genes in
S. cerevisiae measured by a microarray dedicated to the tRNAs in this species
(Dittmar et al., 2004). tRNA levels were measured independently with two alter-
native dyes (Cy5 and Cy3), each producing similar correlations with the gene
copy numbers.
See also Table S1 and Figure S1.
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.
345


--- Page 3 ---
design might support a fast release and recycling of the initiating
methionine tRNA. In most of the examined eukaryotic species,
predominantly in fungi, the proﬁle shows an increase in efﬁciency
toward the last 50 codons of the genes, which in fungi are
higher by up to 5% more than the value at the plateau in the
middle section of genes (Figure 2F). Properly randomized
sequences (and also some particular gene sets, see below) do
not give rise to such signals (Figure 2, Table S2).
Although the averaged proﬁle over all genes in a genome is
relatively smooth, the proﬁle of single genes is often noisy. Still
A
C
E
F
D
B
Figure 2. Selected Genome-Averaged Translation
Efﬁciency Proﬁles
(A–D) Averaged translation efﬁciency proﬁle (for the start
line-up, see Experimental Procedures) for the ﬁrst 200
codons in D. melanogaster (A), C. elegans (B), S. cerevisiae
(C), and E. coli (D). Note the different span of values in each
subplot. Each ﬁgure contains the averaged tAI proﬁle
(black) and the randomized proﬁle ±3 standard deviations
(gray; see details in the Experimental Procedures).
(E and F) The translation efﬁciency proﬁles in various
organisms for the start/end codon line-up (see Experi-
mental Procedures). Each row describes the translation
efﬁciency proﬁle of a different organism and each pixel
describes a codon. Green denotes lower tAI, whereas
red denotes higher tAI (see color bar on the right). The
blue vertical line (E) denotes the means of the length of
the ramp (Figure S2, Experimental Procedures) in prokary-
otes/eukaryotes; the ratio between the means of these
regions in eukaryotes/prokaryotes (34.5/24 = 1.43) may
correspond to a difference in the size of the footprinted
region of the eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosomes on
transcripts.
See also Table S2 and Figure S2.
it was important to inspect single genes, identify
those that contribute the most to the observed
averaged signal, and examine the possibility
that other weaker signals may have been
missed at the genome-average level. We thus
deﬁned and identiﬁed the ‘‘bottleneck’’ region
in each individual gene—a sequence window
of 15 codons in length (that represents the
length of the ribosome footprint region on
mRNAs (Alberts et al., 2002; Ingolia et al.,
2009; Kaczanowska and Ryden-Aulin, 2007;
Menetret et al., 2000; Milo et al., 2009; Zhang
et al., 1994; Zhu et al., 1997); very similar results
were observed for windows of 10–20 codons
in length), with the highest averaged values of
1/(local tAI) (i.e., 15 codons with the longest
dwell time in a gene). Figure 3 shows the distri-
bution of locations of the bottleneck regions
along all genes in two distantly related yeast
species, S. cerevisiae and S. pombe. Both distri-
butions show a consistent picture—a clear
tendency to have the bottleneck relatively early
along the genes. Other than this region there
are no other regions that show any pronounced
preference to contain bottlenecks. This picture
shows that the ramp is a superposition of the translation efﬁ-
ciency proﬁle of a relatively high number of genes (e.g., the
bottleneck of 1330 genes is within the ﬁrst 54 codons).
The analyses presented so far have addressed individual
genes on one hand and averages of entire genomes on the other.
An intermediate level is that of sets of genes that share a biolog-
ical function. We considered genes that share the same Gene
Ontology (GO) slim categories (Hirschman et al., 2006). Figures
4A and 4B and Table S3 show the averaged proﬁles of genes
from representative categories. We found that the genes from
346
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 4 ---
many of the GO slim categories show evidence of containing a
ramp. For example, genes that share the GO categories ‘‘cellular
carbohydrate metabolic process’’ and ‘‘transport’’ demonstrate
a very clear ramp. However, other gene sets, including those
that share the GO categories ‘‘transcription’’ and ‘‘nucleus
organization’’ do not have a ramp (see more examples in Fig-
ure 4B and Table S3). Interestingly, the presence of the ramp
is seen even among categories with very different absolute
translation efﬁciency levels. For example, Figure 4C shows the
local translation efﬁciency proﬁle of cytosolic and mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins in S. cerevisiae. Interestingly, although
selection acted to enhance overall efﬁciency of the cytosolic
ribosomal proteins, the initial region shows lower efﬁciency
relative to the rest of the genes.
Beyond inspection of single genes, gene sets, and genome
average, the highest level of averaging is from multiple genomes.
We averaged all the eukaryotic proﬁles and all the prokaryotic
ones. Notably, the length of the ramp (see Figure S2 for an
illustration of how the length of the ramp was computed) in
eukaryotes and prokaryotes is around 1–3 ribosomes (depend-
ing on the deﬁnition of the actual number of nucleotides that
are covered by a single ribosme; Alberts et al., 2002; Ingolia
et al., 2009; Kaczanowska and Ryden-Aulin, 2007; Menetret
et al., 2000; Milo et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 1994; Zhu et al.,
1997). The ratio between the length of the ramp in eukaryotes
and prokaryotes (mean ramp length in eukaryotes is 34.5
codons; mean ramp length in prokaryotes is 24 codons; the ratio
between these lengths is 1.43) may correspond to a difference in
the size of the footprinted region of the eukaryotic and prokary-
otic ribosomes on transcripts.
We next wanted to examine if the ramp is maintained
during an environmental change. For that we returned to the
diauxic shift experiment in which we found some changes in
the relative representation of the various tRNAs in the tRNA
pool (Figures S1 and S2). We computed the ramp for all
A
B
Figure 3. Bottlenecks in Translation Efﬁciency
Tend to Be Localized Close to mRNAs 50 Ends
The distribution of the positions of the bottlenecks in
S. cerevisiae (A) and S. pombe (B). For each bottleneck
position, the number of genes with a bottleneck in that
position was normalized by dividing it by the number of
genes whose length extends beyond that position. The
distribution is similar also when considering only genes
with more than 200 codons (inset).
genes but measured tRNA levels at each
time point instead of the static gene copy
numbers, and we found that the ramp is
largely maintained genome-wide (Figures S1
and S2).
The Universal Translation Efﬁciency
Proﬁle Is under Selection
The
translation
efﬁciency
proﬁle
is
highly
conserved in evolution, but this fact by itself is
not a guarantee that the proﬁle is under direct
selection. An alternative might be that the proﬁle is conserved
as a by-product of selection acting on other conserved
features. We have examined and excluded several speciﬁc
alternatives.
We started by examining the possibility that the observed
proﬁle is conserved merely because the tRNA pool and codon
biases
are
sufﬁciently
conserved.
According
to
this
null
hypothesis, the interspecies differences in the tRNA pool
and the coding sequences are small enough to maintain the
translation efﬁciency even if the proﬁle is not under direct
selection. We thus computed the translation efﬁciency proﬁle
of all the genes from one species using the tRNA pool of
another, repeating this procedure for various pairs of species.
This is a simple computational resemblance of true species
hybridization experiments that are used to tell apart the contri-
bution of cis- and trans-acting factors used in transcription
research (Tirosh et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2007; Wittkopp
et al., 2004). In one such hybrid analysis, the S. cerevisiae
genes were translated using the Y. lipolytica tRNA pool, and
in a reciprocal analysis, the coding sequences of Y. lipolytica
were translated using the tRNA pool from S. cerevisiae. We
have chosen these two species because their tRNA pools
and their codon biases have diverged quite signiﬁcantly
(Man and Pilpel, 2007), yet both species display the conserved
translation efﬁciency proﬁle. Figure 5 shows that in these
hybrids the ramp region is much shorter and shallower.
More generally, the ramp region becomes shorter and shal-
lower when hybridizing S. cerevisiae with tRNA pools from
organisms with increasing evolutionary distances, and also
when examining additional pairs of species (see also Table
S4). These results indicate that the tRNA pools and the codon
preferences have sufﬁciently diverged between species so as
to eliminate the translation efﬁciency proﬁle if it were not
directly selected for. We thus conclude that coevolution of
the tRNA pool and the coding sequences took place in each
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.
347


--- Page 5 ---
species so as to conserve the translation efﬁciency proﬁle.
This suggestion is in line with the general indications of the
emergence of codon bias from coevolution (Vetsigian and
Goldenfeld, 2009).
The second null hypothesis relates to the possibility that the
observed translation efﬁciency proﬁle results from selection
acting at the amino-acid sequence level. In contrast to this
possibility, we found that in the region of the initial ramp the
actual codon chosen from all possible codons of the given
amino acid is often the one with low efﬁciency (see the red plots
corresponding to the AAtAI proﬁle in Table S2; see Experi-
mental Procedures for explanations about the AAtAI proﬁle).
Beyond the ramp region, codon choice does not show this
bias. This result excludes the possibility that the observed
proﬁle is a by-product of constraints at the protein sequence
level.
Likewise, we have excluded another potential alternative
reason for the observed proﬁle, that it is a by-product of a puta-
tive position-dependent variation in the GC content along genes
(Figure S3).
We thus conclude that the translation efﬁciency proﬁles are
not only universally conserved but are also likely under direct
selection, presumably due to direct effects on ﬁtness.
A
B
C
Figure 4. The Proﬁle of Local Translation
Efﬁciency of Selected Gene Groups
(A) The proﬁle of local translation efﬁciency of three
GO slim categories that have a ramp.
(B) The length of the ramp (L2P) of all the GO slim
categories.
(C) The proﬁle of local translation efﬁciency of
cytosolic ribosomal proteins (left) and mitochon-
drial ribosomal proteins (right).
See also Table S3.
Codon-tRNA Adaptation May
Determine Translation Speed
and Ribosome Density along
Transcripts
A central question thus is what actual
physical or biochemical quantity is en-
coded by the translation efﬁciency proﬁle.
One interesting possibility is that the
values of the local tAI determine the local
speed of movement of the translating
ribosome through each codon along
mRNAs. According to this hypothesis,
the ribosomes are moving on average
more slowly at the ramp region. The
hypothesis
that
the
observed
proﬁle
determines the speed of the ribosome at
each position generates a clear prediction
about the density of ribosomes at any
given position. Assuming that ribosome
distributions on mRNAs are at steady
state (e.g., assuming little or no prema-
ture abortions of translation), the ﬂux of ribosomes through
a codon position x is given by
jðxÞ = vðxÞfðxÞ;
where v(x) is the speed of translation at the position x, and f(x) is
the density of ribosomes at that position. In other words, if the
translation efﬁciency proﬁle is a speed proﬁle, we expect it to
be inversely correlated with a ribosome density proﬁle along
genes. In particular, our proﬁle predicts a high density of ribo-
somes at the ﬁrst 30–50 codon positions.
The averaged ribosome density on transcripts (number of ribo-
somes divided by the length of the transcript) had been previ-
ously measured for most of the genes in the S. cerevisiae
genome (Arava et al., 2003). Recently, ribosome densities at
a single base resolution were measured genome-wide for thou-
sands of transcripts in the S. cerevisiae genome (Ingolia et al.,
2009). The measured distribution features a high density of
ribosome at the 50 most 50 codons and a plateau from that
point on (Ingolia et al., 2009). Thus, the low-efﬁciency ramp
that we observed computationally coincides well with the exper-
imentally observed region of high ribosomal density. In general,
comparing the experimentally measured ribosomal density
348
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 6 ---
with
the
reciprocal
of
the
translation
efﬁciency
proﬁle
reveals relatively high similarity (Pearson correlation r = 0.5749;
p < 1028).
We further realized that imperfections in the correlation
between density and the reciprocal of the translation efﬁciency
proﬁle might reﬂect a discrepancy between the translation
efﬁciency proﬁle and the actual speed of ribosomes, e.g., due
to ribosome trafﬁc jams. We will term the local tAI-based speed
proﬁle the ‘‘nominal speed proﬁle.’’ At low translation initiation
rates, the ribosome may indeed move according to this speed
proﬁle. Yet at higher initiation rates, ribosomes may start to
jam and hence might move with a different local speed, which
we term the ‘‘effective speed proﬁle.’’ To estimate the effective
speed proﬁle and its deviation from the nominal speed proﬁle
at each position, we simulated ribosome movement on tran-
scripts (Zhang et al., 1994, Figure S4, Experimental Procedures,
and Extended Experimental Procedures 3–5). The basic rule that
governs the movement in the simulation is that a ribosome
proceeds through a given codon position according to the
nominal translation speed proﬁle unless it collides with the ribo-
some in front of it, in which case it halts until that ribosome
proceeds forward. We ran the simulation for each S. cerevisiae
gene whose ribosome density proﬁle was measured experimen-
tally by Ingolia et al. (2009) separately and inferred the effective
speed proﬁles and the simulated proﬁles of ribosome densities.
Strikingly, when we averaged the single-gene effective speed
proﬁles (with the same averaging as done for the density proﬁles;
Ingolia et al., 2009), we found that the reciprocal of the obtained
effective speed proﬁle highly correlates (r = 0.93; p < 1075;
Figure 6A) with the experimental density proﬁle. Similarly, when
we averaged the proﬁles of ribosome densities we found that
the computed density proﬁle highly resembles the experimental
one (up to r = 0.96; Figure 6B). The main free parameter in the
simulation is the translation initiation rate  the inverse of the
time required for a ribosome to attach to, and assemble on, an
mRNA (see Figure S4 and Experimental Procedures). We thus
experimented with a range of feasible initiation rates. As can
be seen in Figure 6B, the high correlation between the experi-
mental and computed densities is maintained throughout a broad
range of initiation rates. Only at very low initiation rates (i.e., long
initiation times) where trafﬁc jams are less likely to form does the
simulated density lose resemblance to the experimental one
(Figure 6B).
Together these results provide an indication that codon-tRNA
adaptation may serve as a code that determines ribosomal
translation speed. These results also suggest that translation
speed, and hence ribosome density, may be encoded in gene
sequences and the tRNA pool. The agreement between the
computational and the experimental proﬁles also indirectly lends
support to the assumptions of the codon-tRNA adaptation
model, e.g., that tRNA gene copy numbers are a good predictor
of the tRNA abundance (dos Reis et al., 2004). A corollary of this
conclusion is that the computed proﬁle is a simple means to
predict the shape of the ribosomal density function in other
species, and that the density function seen in yeast is likely
conserved. This result also suggests how potential changes in
the relative amounts of particular tRNAs (Dittmar et al., 2006;
Graslund et al., 2008) might modify the proﬁle of ribosome
density in a given species or a given condition. For instance, if
the concentration of a rare tRNA, whose matched codons mainly
concentrate close to 50 ends of genes, is elevated at a given
condition the result might be a more ﬂat density function.
Finally, under conditions of amino-acid starvation, the ﬁrst 40–
50 codons showed high ribosomal density (Ingolia et al., 2009).
This increased ribosomal density seems more pronounced than
the density that is observed in rich media. Based on the correla-
tion we demonstrated between ribosome density and reciprocal
of speed, we suggest that the speed of the ribosome is slower
at the beginning of genes in this condition. That is, in
S. cerevisiae, the ramp is maintained (and is probably more pro-
nounced) under a starvation condition (note that the tRNA pool
may change in starvation; see, for example, Dittmar et al., 2005).
A
C
B
D
Figure
5. Hybrid
Analysis
Indicates
Selection for Coevolution of tRNA Pools
and Genes Sequences to Preserve the Ramp
Translation efﬁciency proﬁles with native and
nonnative tRNA pools for start codon line-up.
(A) The translation efﬁciency proﬁle of S. cerevi-
siae.
(B) The translation efﬁciency proﬁle of S. cerevisiae
using Y. lipolytica tRNA pool.
(C) The translation efﬁciency proﬁle of Y. lipolytica.
(D) The translation efﬁciency proﬁle of Y. lipolytica
using S. cerevisiae tRNA pool.
The black bolded line represents the actual calcu-
lated tAI proﬁle; the gray lines represent the
mean ± 3 standard deviations of the tAI proﬁles
of randomized sets of gene. See also Table S4
and Figure S3.
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.
349


--- Page 7 ---
We do note that additional factors are likely involved in setting
the speed and density of translating ribosomes. In particular, the
folding energy of the mRNA secondary structure appears to be
highly relevant (Kudla et al., 2009; Tuller et al., 2010), and it
remains to be investigated how tRNA availability and mRNA
structure interact in determining the ﬁnal density proﬁle.
The Potential Fitness Advantages of the Translation
Efﬁciency Proﬁle
The conclusion from the density and speed analysis is that the
ramp limits the speed of ribosomes over the ﬁrst dozens of
codons on transcripts and generates as a consequence a
high-density area. The generation of a short high-density section
at the 50 region of mRNAs may give rise to a jam-free region over
the rest of the transcript because ribosomes that pass the bottle-
neck are less likely to jam. Under this assumption, ramping
would be needed mainly for genes with high overall ribosome
density as these genes would be more prone to jamming. In
addition, it is conceivable that a jam on a gene with high
mRNA copy number is likely to be more detrimental than a
comparable jam that occurs on a low mRNA copy number
gene. We thus returned to the ribosomal density (Ingolia et al.,
2009) and mRNA copy number data (Ghaemmaghami et al.,
2003) and characterized each gene by its mRNA copy number
or ribosome density or by multiplying its mRNA copy number
by its ribosome density, and we looked separately on genes at
the top and bottom 10% of the distribution of these features.
We found that genes with highest ribosomal density, mRNA
level, or the product of ribosome density and mRNA levels
display a stronger ramp than genes with the lowest levels of
these features (Figure 6C). We veriﬁed that this signal is not a
result of difference in protein length between the two gene sets
(not shown). We note that the length of the slow ramp is a mean-
ingful parameter given that across the various species it is signif-
icantly correlated with the extent of selection for translation
efﬁciency (Figure S4). In addition, a similar analysis demon-
strated that the ramp signal is stronger in genes with higher
protein-to-mRNA abundance ratios (see Figure S4). In that
respect, we note that the ramp is ‘‘universal’’ in that it is observed
in all analyzed species, yet we expect that only a strategic
portion of the genes in each genome will feature this design—
primarily genes that need to operate at a high production level.
A recent study (Kudla et al., 2009) looking at the inﬂuence of
mRNA structure on translation initiation provides an opportunity
to measure in a more direct way the effect of obeying the trans-
lation efﬁciency proﬁle on the organism’s ﬁtness. In that study,
154 versions of the gene encoding the green ﬂuorescent protein
(GFP) were synthesized such that the 3rd codon positions were
randomized. Each version was driven by a strong promoter,
expressed in E. coli, and cells’ ﬁtness was measured for each
A
B
C
Figure 6. Experimentally Measured Ribosome Density Negatively
Correlates with Computed Translation Efﬁciency
(A) Correlation between experimentally measured ribosomal density (Ingolia
et al., 2009) and the reciprocal of the simulated speed proﬁle when not
considering the ﬁrst ﬁve codons (which are outliers) and when considering
all the codons (the subﬁgure at the lower right corner). Dots are color coded
according to codon location along genes, with the greenest dots representing
codons that are close to the ATG, and codons that are farthest away in red. The
density and speed proﬁles were obtained by averaging the proﬁles at each
position of the genes in the S. cerevisiae genome. The speed proﬁle was
obtained by simulating ribosomal scan of all the transcripts in this species.
The Pearson correlation between density and 1/speed is 0.93 (p < 1075).
The correlation between density and the reciprocal of original ‘‘nominal’’ trans-
lation efﬁciency proﬁle is lower, r = 0.5749 (p < 1028).
(B) The correlation between the mean proﬁle of ribosome density (Ingolia et al.,
2009) and the mean proﬁle of simulated ribosome density (Experimental
Procedures) at a resolution of single codons for different simulated ribosome
binding initiation time (units of the translation time of the slowest codon; see
Experimental Procedures for deﬁnition).
(C) The translation efﬁciency proﬁle of genes with the top and the lowest
ribosomal density distribution. As can be seen, the extent of ramping
decreases at lowly dense genes.
The results remain signiﬁcant also after controlling for the length of the genes
(genes with higher ribosome density tend to be shorter). Speciﬁcally, the
group of the 20% genes with the lowest ribosome density after removing the
50% longest genes (the ﬁnal mean length is 1433; ramp length 30) have longer
ramp than the group of the 20% genes with the highest ribosome density
after removing the 50% shortest genes (the ﬁnal mean length is 1447;
ramp length 89). See also Figure S4.
350
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 8 ---
strain (Kudla et al., 2009). That study presented experimental
evidence that average codon bias might minimize the burden
of protein expression on the cell (Kudla et al., 2009). Although
this GFP library was not designed for the purpose of testing
the effects of the ramp, we still found that some of the GFP
proteins have a proﬁle that somewhat resembles the ramp,
whereas others do not show this feature. Consistently, we ﬁnd
a modest, yet signiﬁcant correlation between the extent to which
a GFP variant obeys the translation efﬁciency proﬁle and the
ﬁtness of the strain that expresses it (r = 0.2; p value < 0.014;
Figure 7A). Further, we partitioned the genes in the library
according to their average tAI value and focused on 25% of
the variants with the lowest tAI values. These genes could
generate the highest burden on ﬁtness due to potential
overall low translation efﬁciency (Kudla et al., 2009). Among
those genes, there exists a higher correlation (r = 0.6, n = 37,
p value < 1.26*104) between the extent of agreement with the
translation efﬁciency proﬁle and bacterial ﬁtness (Figure 7A).
Thus, especially among genes with lower translation efﬁciency
(and hence higher ribosome density) obeying the translation efﬁ-
ciency proﬁle is crucial for minimizing ﬁtness reduction. This
observation thus suggests that the ramp in translation efﬁciency
proﬁles found in endogenous genes may have been selected for
minimizing the cost of protein expression due to translation.
The data of Kudla et al. (2009) can be used for understanding
the relation between ramp, ﬁtness, and the component of the
initiation rate (relative to the elongation rate) that is determined
by the properties of the 50UTRs. All the GFP variants have iden-
tical 50UTR sequences and thus identical (absolute) initiation
rates; however, as the coding sequences were randomized,
the elongation rate (measured by the tAI) is different for different
GFP variants. Thus, the different GFP variants have different
relative initiation-to-elongation rates. The relative initiation rate
is higher when the tAI is lower. Figure 7A (inset), thus, demon-
strates that the ramp is more important when the relative initia-
tion rate is higher.
DISCUSSION
The Potential Role of the Ramp in the Context
of Initiation Control
Translation initiation is a prime point of control as it governs the
binding and assembly of the ribosome and the initiation
machinery on a transcript. These processes mainly take place
at the 50UTRs of genes. The ramp we describe here may repre-
sent an important next stage of translational control that modu-
lates the parameters set by the previous initiation stage. The
ramp may thus couple between initiation and elongation and
add unique regulatory features, stemming from the fact that it
is ‘‘written’’ on a translated sequence.
Robustness and Economy—Reduction
of Expression Cost by Filtering out Randomness
The 50UTR of each mRNA serves as a control region by modu-
lating translation initiation through, for example, inﬂuence over
ribosome binding rate. The secondary structure and the nucleo-
tide sequence in this region affect both the average spacing
between ribosomes (and hence the protein production rate at
steady state) and the statistical deviations around that average.
As we turn the initiation rate knob to increase the protein produc-
tion rate, these ﬂuctuations become increasingly more likely to
generate instances of too closely spaced ribosomes that can
A
B
Figure 7. The Effect of Ramping on Fitness, Production, and
Expression Cost
(A) Growth rate (measured by OD) of each GFP variant (Kudla et al., 2009)
versus similarity (measured by Spearman correlation) between the translation
efﬁciency proﬁle of the variant and the averaged proﬁle of all endogenous
genes in E. coli. Upper left corner: the above correlation computed separately
for quadrants of the GFP library binned according to their tAI values. Main
ﬁgure: dot plot of the growth rate versus similarity to the genomic translation
efﬁciency proﬁle of E. coli for the different variants in the GFP library (correla-
tion coefﬁcient r = 0.2; p < 0.014); points that are related to the lowest tAI
quadrant bin in the subﬁgure are colored blue, other points are red.
(B) A conceptual model depicting the value in selection for ramping in transcripts
withhightranslationrates.Wecomparetherelationshipbetweentranslationiniti-
ation rate and cost of translation per protein for transcripts with (red) and without
(blue) ramp designs. At low translation initiation rates, the ribosomes move inde-
pendently of one another, thus the cost of translation per protein is independent
of the initiation rate. The ramp design incurs a cost because it slows down the
ribosomes. At high translation initiation rates, however, ribosome trafﬁc jams
increasingly dominate the cost of translation. In this regime, ramping reduces
the cost of protein production at a given production level and increases the
production capacity at a given cost. The translation initiation rate and the degree
of ramping are two knobs that evolution can tune to maximize ﬁtness, which, in
the case shown,favorthe ramp.Theiso-ﬁtness lines reﬂect an increase inﬁtness
with protein production rate and decreases with the total cost of translation.
See also Table S5.
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.
351


--- Page 9 ---
jam and, potentially, also abort translation. Thus, ﬂuctuations
become increasingly more costly. The ramp in the coding
sequence, however, may provide a second and independent
knob that can tune down the variance set by initiation rate in
the spacing between ribosomes. The ramp consists of dozens
of codons, each determining a separate random event of tRNA
binding, and thus serves as a very effective noise ﬁlter; the prob-
ability that with the passage of a given ribosome, all the codons
in the ramp will allow fast movement of the ribosome, and poten-
tially collision with the ribosome ahead of it, is practically zero. Of
course such a design is not needed for proteins with a very low
binding rate; these are unlikely to jam anyway, and indeed the
extent of ramping decreases at lowly dense genes in the yeast
genome (Figure 6C).
Potential for Gene-Speciﬁc and Condition-Speciﬁc
Control
The ramp may encode an interesting sensing capability—the
low-efﬁciency codons at the beginning of transcripts may allow
high sensitivity to the abundance of amino acid-loaded tRNAs
in the cell. As such, it may provide a simple mechanism for early,
thus low-cost, abortion of translation in the case of a paucity of
raw material. In more general terms, compared to control
through the UTR, the ramp has a potential to control differentially
individual genes under different conditions. Indeed we see that
different functional gene sets may represent different designs
of the ramp. We also predict that the shape of the ramp may
change for particular genes across conditions (e.g., if the
concentration of some of the tRNAs is modulated relative to
others). The ramp may thus encode for gene-speciﬁc and condi-
tion-speciﬁc dynamic control of early translation elongation.
A Range of Potential Physiological Roles for the Ramp
The ramp in translation efﬁciency has the potential of reducing
trafﬁc jamming of ribosomes. Reduction in jamming is, in turn,
desired for several reasons. First, it reduces the total amount
of time that ribosomes are sequestered on a given transcript.
Second, jammed ribosomes, which halt at slow codons (Li
et al., 2006), spend more time on the transcript, increasing the
probability of spontaneous fall off. Abortive protein synthesis
may also occur due to collisions between jammed ribosomes;
thus ramps may be advantageous in preventing spontaneous
and collision-dependent abortions. On top of that, the ramp
may limit most abortions that do occur to the beginning of the
transcripts. This may be desired because in these regions fall
off is least wasteful in terms of energy (ATPs) and raw materials
(e.g., charged tRNAs). Thus low speed at the beginning may
reﬂect reduced purifying pressure against early abortion, or
a pressure to concentrate abortions at early stages if they reduce
late, costly ones. In this respect, the elevation in translation speed
toward the end of transcripts (seen mainly among the fungi) may
reﬂect a deliberate selective pressure to avoid late abortions.
We assume that at a given level of protein expression the cost
of production increases with the total time ribosomes spend on
mRNAs. Although the initial ramp may increase that time (and
hence the cost) over the initial section of mRNA transcripts, it
may result in an overall shorter duration of sequestering of trans-
lating ribosomes. Thus if ramping decreases the probability of
jamming it may reduce the cost of gene expression at a given
production level and increase the production capacity at a given
cost (Figure 7B; see also Table S5 and Extended Experimental
Procedures 3–5). Note, however, that when initiation rate is
low, jamming is less likely as matter of course and hence ramp-
ing may only incur a slowing-down cost with no subsequent
gain (Figure 7B), explaining why genes with low ribosome densi-
ties have a shorter ramp (Figure 6C).
A proﬁle of translation speed may also correspond to a posi-
tion-speciﬁc proﬁle of translation errors—longer dwell times at
slow codons may result not only in abortion but also in higher
translation error probabilities (Drummond and Wilke, 2008;
Kurland, 1992). According to this notion we predict that the
beginnings of proteins may accumulate more translation muta-
tions compared to other regions in proteins. The speed proﬁle
may also constitute an essential code for proper protein folding
(Kimchi-Sarfaty et al., 2007; Widmann et al., 2008).
Some of these considerations may also apply to other
biological processes. For example, it would be interesting if
transcription, and the movement of motor proteins such as
kinesin, implement a similar design of ‘‘slow start’’ to alleviate
some of the ‘‘process costs’’ and the effects of stochasticity
(Schnitzer and Block, 1995; Svoboda et al., 1994). Our work
may have direct implications not only for understanding evolu-
tionary processes underlying translational control but also for
the technology of heterologous gene expression. This more
applied area is another domain where the question ‘‘what is
the optimal level of expression of genes?’’ must be asked. The
science and art of expressing a gene from one species in another
often amounts to modifying the codons of the gene and supple-
menting the host with speciﬁc tRNAs (Graslund et al., 2008). Yet
the full challenge of heterologous expression is not only to maxi-
mize expression per host cell but also to minimize the burden on
the host or maximize ﬁtness of the entire ‘‘factory.’’ We suggest
that implementation of appropriate ramping in heterologous
proteins, given the host’s tRNA pool, might improve the yield
and success rate with this technology for the same reasons it
was selected evolutionarily.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Data Sources of Information
The tRNA copy numbers and the coding sequences of the nine yeasts were
downloaded from the work of Man and Pilpel (Man and Pilpel, 2007). The
tRNA copy numbers of the other organisms were downloaded from the
Genomic tRNA Database (http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/GtRNAdb/) (Lowe and
Eddy, 1997). The coding sequences of the ﬂy and the worm were downloaded
from BioMart (Durinck et al., 2005) on August 2008; the coding sequences of
other eukaryotes were downloaded from NCBI on May 2009. The coding
regions of all the archaea and bacteria were downloaded from NCBI (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Ftp/) on August 2008. The mRNA levels and protein
abundance were downloaded from the work of Ghaemmaghami (Ghaemma-
ghami et al., 2003).
Per nucleotide ribosome density of 1525 genes was obtained from the work
of Ingolia et al. (2009); when we compared density to speed (tAI) or simulated
density we used the same set of genes as was used in Ingolia et al. (2009).
The version of the GFP protein with synthetic random codon bias and corre-
sponding measurements of growth rate (optical density, OD) were obtained
from the work of Kudla et al. (2009). Information about the length of the eukary-
otic/prokaryotic ribosome footprinted mRNA segment was based on Alberts
et al. (2002), Ingolia et al. (2009), Kaczanowska and Ryden-Aulin (2007),
352
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.


--- Page 10 ---
Menetret et al. (2000), Milo et al. (2009), Zhang et al. (1994), and Zhu et al.
(1997). The lists of ribosomal proteins were downloaded from Hirschman
et al. (2006).
Computing tAI, AAtAI
In this subsection we will brieﬂy describe the different measures for translation
efﬁciency used in this work. We used two measures for translation efﬁciency:
tAI and AAtAI. As we explain later, the latter was used as a control for a potential
amino-acid sequence bias.
The tAI
We computed the tAI similarly to the way it was computed in the work of dos
Reis et al. (2004). This measure gauges the availability of tRNAs for each codon
along an mRNA. As codon-anticodon coupling is not unique due to wobble
interactions, several anticodons can recognize the same codon, with different
efﬁciency weights (see dos Reis et al. for all the relations between codon-
anticodons).
Let ni be the number of tRNA isoacceptors recognizing codon i. Let tGCNij
be the copy number of the jth tRNA that recognizes the ith codon, and let Sij be
the selective constraint on the efﬁciency of the codon-anticodon coupling. We
deﬁne the absolute adaptiveness, Wi, for each codon i as
Wi =
X
ni
j = 1
ð1  SijÞtGCNij:
(1a)
From Wi we obtain wi, which is the relative adaptiveness value of codon i, by
normalizing the Wi’s values (dividing them by the maximal of all 61Wi).
wi = Wi=ðmax WiÞ:
(1b)
The ﬁnal tAI of a gene, g, is the following geometric mean:
tAIg =
 Y
lg
k = 1
wikg
1=lg
;
(2)
where ikg is the codon deﬁned by the k’th triplet on gene g, and lg is the length
of the gene (excluding stop codons).
We made one change compared to the computations of dos Reis et al.; we
re-inferred the Sij values by performing hill-climbing optimization of the
Spearman correlation between protein abundance and translation efﬁciency
in S. cerevisae. For this purpose we used the protein abundance measure-
ments of Ghaemmaghami et al. (2003). The Sij values can be organized in
a vector (S vector) as described in dos Reis et al. (2004); each component in
this vector is related to one wobble nucleoside-nucleoside paring: I:U, G:U,
G:C, I:C, U:A, I:A, etc. The ﬁnal S vector obtained by our optimization was
½0 0 0 0 0:561 0:28 0:9999 0:68 0:89:
The AAtAI
The amino acid tAI (AAtAI) was computed similarly to the tAI. The only change
is that each wi is obtained from Wi by dividing it by the maximal Wi of all codons
coding the same amino acid that codon i codes for. Thus, the AAtAI reﬂects
normalization by the maximal possible tAI of a given protein sequence.
Computing Local tAI and AAtAI
In the case of the tAI, the local proﬁle of a gene was deﬁned as the vector of the
tAI values assigned to the gene’s codons (omitting the ﬁrst ATG), i.e.:
Local tAIGenei =

tAIc2; tAIc3; .; tAIcn

;
where ci is the codon at position i in the gene (cn is the codon before the stop
codon). For a particular species, all the genes in the genome were lined up
once according to their start codon, and once according to their stop codon,
and averaged head and tail proﬁles were calculated as
Local tAIstart =

tAI2; tAI3; tAI4; .

Local tAIend =

tAIn; tAIn1; tAIn2; .

where
tAIi =
X
Genesi
tAIci =jGenesij
and Genesi is the number of genes with at least i+1 codons.
The local values for AAtAI were computed in a similar way—we considered
AAtAI of codons instead of codons’ tAI.
Proﬁles of AAtAI describe tAI after controlling for amino-acid bias. Thus, we
expect these proﬁles to be similar to the proﬁles of the tAI if indeed the
observed tAI proﬁle is related to translation efﬁciency and not amino-acid bias.
Randomized Proﬁles of Translation Efﬁciency
To verify that the observed translation efﬁciency proﬁle is not an artiﬁcial result
of the fact that we lined up the genes by the start/stop codon, we performed
the following control. Each coding sequence was randomly shufﬂed, and the
average genome proﬁle was calculated. This process was repeated 100 times.
The mean and standard deviations of the 100 sets of proﬁle were then calcu-
lated for each position. The randomized proﬁles were compared to the original
proﬁle.
Simulation of Ribosomal Movement
To explore the movement of ribosomes along the mRNA sequences we used
a simulation, based on the model of Zhang et al. (1994) (see Figure S4 and
more details in Extended Experimental Procedures 3–5). By this model, a single
codon translation time is determined per ribosome by the translation time of
that codon (i.e., the tAI of the codon) and the potential presence of a ribosome
in front of it: if there is no ribosome in front of the given ribosome its velocity is
solely governed by the translation efﬁciency proﬁle, yet to maintain a required
minimal distance between the subsequent ribosomes, if there is a ribosome
in front of the given one, it is delayed until the ribosome in front of it has
proceeded on. Other parameters of the simulations are as follows: the
minimum distance between two consecutive ribosomes, the ribosome binding
time, and the termination time—the time required for the ribosome to release
the mRNA.
Measurement of the tRNA Pool in S. cerevisiae
Logarithmic culture (2.5 3 106 cells/ml) of S. cerevisae cells (Strain 4741:
MATa; his3D1; leu2D0; met15D0; ura3D0) was grown on YPD medium (2%
yeast extract, 1% peptone, 1% dextrose) at 30C until reaching stationary
phase. During growth, glucose concentration in the media was measured
using UV test kit (Boehringer Mannheim catalog number 716251) and the
diauxic shift was identiﬁed. At 1.5 hr intervals during growth, samples were
taken and frozen in liquid nitrogen. RNA was extracted using MasterPure
(EPICENTER
Biotechnologies)
and
hybridized
to
tRNA
microarray
as
described in Dittmar et al. (2006), Pavon-Eternod et al. (2009), and Zaborske
et al. (2009). Brieﬂy, the basic protocol consists of four steps starting from total
RNA: (1) deacylation to remove remaining amino acids attached to the tRNA,
(2) selective Cy3/Cy5 labeling of tRNA, (3) hybridization on commercially
printed arrays, and (4) data analysis.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, four
ﬁgures, and ﬁve tables and can be found with this article online at doi:10.
1016/j.cell.2010.03.031.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Pilpel lab and Chaim Kahana, Ran Kafri, Ron Milo, Uri Alon,
Michael Springer, Jeremy Gunawardena, Eytan Ruppin, and Martin Kupiec
for stimulating discussions and Orna Man for critically reading the manuscript.
We thank the ‘‘Ideas’’ program of the European Research Council, EMBRACE
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.
353


--- Page 11 ---
Network of Excellence grant of the European Commission within its FP6
Programme, and the Ben May Charitable Trust for grant support. T.T. is a
Koshland Scholar at the Weizmann Institute of Science.
Received: July 7, 2009
Revised: December 8, 2009
Accepted: March 19, 2010
Published: April 15, 2010
REFERENCES
Akashi, H. (2003). Translational selection and yeast proteome evolution.
Genetics 164, 1291–1303.
Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K., and Walter, P. (2002).
Molecular Biology of the Cell (New York: Garland Publishing).
Arava, Y., Wang, Y., Storey, J.D., Liu, C.L., Brown, P.O., and Herschlag, D.
(2003). Genome-wide analysis of mRNA translation proﬁles in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 3889–3894.
DeRisi, J.L., Iyer, V.R., and Brown, P.O. (1997). Exploring the metabolic and
genetic control of gene expression on a genomic scale. Science 278, 680–686.
Dittmar, K.A., Mobley, E.M., Radek, A.J., and Pan, T. (2004). Exploring the
regulation of tRNA distribution on the genomic scale. J. Mol. Biol. 337, 31–47.
Dittmar, K.A., Sorensen, M.A., Elf, J., Ehrenberg, M., and Pan, T. (2005).
Selective charging of tRNA isoacceptors induced by amino-acid starvation.
EMBO Rep. 6, 151–157.
Dittmar, K.A., Goodenbour, J.M., and Pan, T. (2006). Tissue-speciﬁc differ-
ences in human transfer RNA expression. PLoS Genet. 2, e221.
dos Reis, M., Savva, R., and Wernisch, L. (2004). Solving the riddle of codon
usage preferences: a test for translational selection. Nucleic Acids Res. 32,
5036–5044.
Drummond, D.A., and Wilke, C.O. (2008). Mistranslation-induced protein
misfolding as a dominant constraint on coding-sequence evolution. Cell 134,
341–352.
Durinck, S., Moreau, Y., Kasprzyk, A., Davis, S., De Moor, B., Brazma, A., and
Huber, W. (2005). BioMart and Bioconductor: a powerful link between biolog-
ical databases and microarray data analysis. Bioinformatics 21, 3439–3440.
Ghaemmaghami, S., Huh, W.K., Bower, K., Howson, R.W., Belle, A.,
Dephoure, N., O’Shea, E.K., and Weissman, J.S. (2003). Global analysis of
protein expression in yeast. Nature 425, 737–741.
Graslund, S., Nordlund, P., Weigelt, J., Hallberg, B.M., Bray, J., Gileadi, O.,
Knapp, S., Oppermann, U., Arrowsmith, C., Hui, R., et al. (2008). Protein
production and puriﬁcation. Nat. Methods 5, 135–146.
Gray, N.K., and Hentze, M.W. (1994). Regulation of protein synthesis by mRNA
structure. Mol. Biol. Rep. 19, 195–200.
Hirschman, J.E., Balakrishnan, R., Christie, K.R., Costanzo, M.C., Dwight,
S.S., Engel, S.R., Fisk, D.G., Hong, E.L., Livstone, M.S., Nash, R., et al.
(2006). Genome Snapshot: a new resource at the Saccharomyces Genome
Database (SGD) presenting an overview of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
genome. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, D442–D445.
Ingolia, N.T., Ghaemmaghami, S., Newman, J.R., and Weissman, J.S. (2009).
Genome-wide analysis in vivo of translation with nucleotide resolution using
ribosome proﬁling. Science 324, 218–223.
Kaczanowska, M., and Ryden-Aulin, M. (2007). Ribosome biogenesis and the
translation process in Escherichia coli. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 71, 477–494.
Kimchi-Sarfaty, C., Oh, J.M., Kim, I.-W., Sauna, Z.E., Calcagno, A.M., Ambud-
kar, S.V., and Gottesman, M.M. (2007). A ‘‘Silent’’ polymorphism in the MDR1
gene changes substrate speciﬁcity. Science 315, 525–528.
Kudla, G., Murray, A.W., Tollervey, D., and Plotkin, J.B. (2009). Coding-
sequence determinants of gene expression in Escherichia coli. Science 324,
255–258.
Kurland, C.G. (1992). Translational accuracy and the ﬁtness of bacteria. Annu.
Rev. Genet. 26, 29–50.
Li, X., Hirano, R., Tagami, H., and Aiba, H. (2006). Protein tagging at rare
codons is caused by tmRNA action at the 30 end of nonstop mRNA generated
in response to ribosome stalling. RNA 12, 248–255.
Lowe, T.M., and Eddy, S.R. (1997). tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved
detection of transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res.
25, 955–964.
Man, O., and Pilpel, Y. (2007). Differential translation efﬁciency of orthologous
genes is involved in phenotypic divergence of yeast species. Nat. Genet. 39,
415–421.
Menetret, J.F., Neuhof, A., Morgan, D.G., Plath, K., Radermacher, M.,
Rapoport, T.A., and Akey, C.W. (2000). The structure of ribosome-channel
complexes engaged in protein translocation. Mol. Cell 6, 1219–1232.
Milo, R., Jorgensen, P., Moran, U., Weber, G., and Springer, M. (2009).
BioNumbers–the database of key numbers in molecular and cell biology.
Nucleic Acids Res. 23, 23.
Pavon-Eternod, M., Wei, M., Pan, T., and Kleiman, L. (2009). Proﬁling non-lysyl
tRNAs in HIV-1. RNA 16, 267–273.
Percudani, R., Pavesi, A., and Ottonello, S. (1997). Transfer RNA gene
redundancy and translational selection in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Mol.
Biol. 268, 322–330.
Qin, H., Wu, W.B., Comeron, J.M., Kreitman, M., and Li, W.H. (2004).
Intragenic spatial patterns of codon usage bias in prokaryotic and eukaryotic
genomes. Genetics 168, 2245–2260.
Schnitzer, M.J., and Block, S.M. (1995). Statistical kinetics of processive
enzymes. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 60, 793–802.
Sharp, P.M., and Li, W.H. (1987). The codon Adaptation Index–a measure
of directional synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential applications.
Nucleic Acids Res. 15, 1281–1295.
Svoboda, K., Mitra, P.P., and Block, S.M. (1994). Fluctuation analysis of motor
protein movement and single enzyme kinetics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91,
11782–11786.
Tirosh, I., Reikhav, S., Levy, A.A., and Barkai, N. (2009). A yeast hybrid
provides insight into the evolution of gene expression regulation. Science
324, 659–662.
Tuller, T., Kupiec, M., and Ruppin, E. (2007). Determinants of protein
abundance and translation efﬁciency in S. cerevisiae. PLoS Comput. Biol. 3,
e248.
Tuller, T., Waldman, Y.Y., Kupiec, M., and Ruppin, E. (2010). Translation
efﬁciency is determined by both codon bias and folding energy. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 3645–3650.
Vetsigian, K., and Goldenfeld, N. (2009). Genome rhetoric and the emergence
of compositional bias. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 215–220.
Wang, D., Sung, H.M., Wang, T.Y., Huang, C.J., Yang, P., Chang, T., Wang,
Y.C., Tseng, D.L., Wu, J.P., Lee, T.C., et al. (2007). Expression evolution in
yeast genes of single-input modules is mainly due to changes in trans-acting
factors. Genome Res. 17, 1161–1169.
Widmann, M., Clairo, M., Dippon, J., and Pleiss, J. (2008). Analysis of the
distribution of functionally relevant rare codons. BMC Genomics 9, 207.
Wittkopp, P.J., Haerum, B.K., and Clark, A.G. (2004). Evolutionary changes in
cis and trans gene regulation. Nature 430, 85–88.
Zaborske, J.M., Narasimhan, J., Jiang, L., Wek, S.A., Dittmar, K.A., Freimoser,
F., Pan, T., and Wek, R.C. (2009). Genome-wide analysis of tRNA charging and
activation of the eIF2 kinase Gcn2p. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 25254–25267.
Zhang, S., Goldman, E., and Zubay, G. (1994). Clustering of low usage codons
and ribosome movement. J. Theor. Biol. 170, 339–354.
Zhu, J., Penczek, P.A., Schroder, R., and Frank, J. (1997). Three-dimensional
reconstruction with contrast transfer function correction from energy-ﬁltered
cryoelectron micrographs: procedure and application to the 70S Escherichia
coli ribosome. J. Struct. Biol. 118, 197–219.
354
Cell 141, 344–354, April 16, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.
